Why , then are you no maiden . Leonato ,
I am sorry you must hear : upon mine honour ,
Myself , my brother , and this grieved count ,
Did see her , hear her , at that hour last night ,
Talk with a ruffian at her chamber-window ;
Who hath indeed , most like a liberal villain ,
Confess'd the vile encounters they have had 
A thousand times in secret .

Fie , fie ! they are not to be nam'd , my lord ,
Not to be spoke of ;
There is not chastity enough in language 
Without offence to utter them . Thus , pretty lady ,
I am sorry for thy much misgovernment .

O Hero ! what a Hero hadst thou been ,
If half thy outward graces had been plac'd 
About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart !
But fare thee well , most foul , most fair ! farewell ,
Thou pure impiety , and impious purity !
For thee I'll lock up all the gates of love ,
And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang ,
To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm ,
And never shall it more be gracious .

Hath no man's dagger here a point for me ?


Why , how now , cousin ! wherefore sink you down ?

Come , let us go . These things , come thus to light ,
Smother her spirits up .


How doth the lady ?

Dead , I think ! help , uncle !
Hero ! why , Hero ! Uncle ! Signior Benedick !
Friar !

O Fate ! take not away thy heavy hand :
Death is the fairest cover for her shame 
That may be wish'd for .

How now , cousin Hero !

Have comfort , lady .

Dost thou look up ?

Yea ; wherefore should she not ?

Wherefore ! Why , doth not every earthly thing 
Cry shame upon her ? Could she here deny 
The story that is printed in her blood ?
Do not live , Hero ; do not ope thine eyes ;
For , did I think thou wouldst not quickly die ,
Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy shames ,
Myself would , on the rearward of reproaches ,
Strike at thy life . Griev'd I , I had but one ?
Chid I for that at frugal nature's frame ?
O ! one too much by thee . Why had I one ?
Why ever wast thou lovely in mine eyes ?
Why had I not with charitable hand 
Took up a beggar's issue at my gates ,
Who smirched thus , and mir'd with infamy ,
I might have said , 'No part of it is mine ;
This shame derives itself from unknown loins ?' 
But mine , and mine I lov'd , and mine I prais'd ,
And mine that I was proud on , mine so much 
That I myself was to myself not mine ,
Valuing of her ; why , she O ! she is fallen 
Into a pit of ink , that the wide sea 
Hath drops too few to wash her clean again ,
And salt too little which may season give 
To her foul-tainted flesh .

Sir , sir , be patient .
For my part , I am so attir'd in wonder ,
I know not what to say .

O ! on my soul , my cousin is belied !

Lady , were you her bedfellow last night ?

No , truly , not ; although , until last night ,
I have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow .

Confirm'd , confirm'd ! O ! that is stronger made ,
Which was before barr'd up with ribs of iron .
Would the two princes lie ? and Claudio lie ,
Who lov'd her so , that , speaking of her foulness ,
Wash'd it with tears ? Hence from her ! let her die .

Hear me a little ;
For I have only been silent so long ,
And given way unto this course of fortune ,
By noting of the lady : I have mark'd 
A thousand blushing apparitions 
To start into her face ; a thousand innocent shames 
In angel whiteness bear away those blushes ;
And in her eye there hath appear'd a fire ,
To burn the errors that these princess hold 
Against her maiden truth . Call me a fool ;
Trust not my reading nor my observations ,
Which with experimental seal doth warrant 
The tenour of my book ; trust not my age ,
My reverence , calling , nor divinity ,
If this sweet lady lie not guiltless here 
Under some biting error .

Friar , it cannot be .
Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left 
Is , that she will not add to her damnation 
A sin of perjury : she not denies it .
Why seek'st thou then to cover with excuse 
That which appears in proper nakedness ?

Lady , what man is he you are accus'd of ?

They know that do accuse me , I know none ;
If I know more of any man alive 
Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant ,
Let all my sins lack mercy ! O , my father !
Prove you that any man with me convers'd 
At hours unmeet , or that I yesternight 
Maintain'd the change of words with any creature ,
Refuse me , hate me , torture me to death .

There is some strange misprision in the princes .

Two of them have the very bent of honour ;
And if their wisdoms be misled in this ,
The practice of it lives in John the bastard ,
Whose spirits toil in frame of villanies .

I know not . If they speak but truth of her ,
These hands shall tear her ; if they wrong her honour ,
The proudest of them shall well hear of it .
Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine .
Nor age so eat up my invention ,
Nor fortune made such havoc of my means ,
Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends ,
But they shall find , awak'd in such a kind ,
Both strength of limb and policy of mind ,
Ability in means and choice of friends ,
To quit me of them throughly .

Pause awhile ,
And let my counsel sway you in this case .
Your daughter here the princes left for dead ;
Let her awhile be secretly kept in ,
And publish it that she is dead indeed :
Maintain a mourning ostentation ;
And on your family's old monument 
Hang mournful epitaphs and do all rites 
That appertain unto a burial .

What shall become of this ? What will this do ?

Marry , this well carried shall on her behalf 
Change slander to remorse ; that is some good :
But not for that dream I on this strange course ,
But on this travail look for greater birth .
She dying , as it must be so maintain'd ,
Upon the instant that she was accus'd ,
Shall be lamented , pitied and excus'd 
Of every hearer ; for it so falls out 
That what we have we prize not to the worth 
Whiles we enjoy it , but being lack'd and lost ,
Why , then we rack the value , then we find 
The virtue that possession would not show us 
Whiles it was ours . So will it fare with Claudio :
When he shall hear she died upon his words ,
The idea of her life shall sweetly creep 
Into his study of imagination ,
And every lovely organ of her life 
Shall come apparell'd in more precious habit ,
More moving-delicate , and full of life 
Into the eye and prospect of his soul ,
Than when she liv'd indeed : then shall he mourn ,
If ever love had interest in his liver ,
And wish he had not so accused her ,
No , though he thought his accusation true .
Let this be so , and doubt not but success 
Will fashion the event in better shape 
Than I can lay it down in likelihood .
But if all aim but this be levell'd false ,
The supposition of the lady's death 
Will quench the wonder of her infamy :
And if it sort not well , you may conceal her ,
As best befits her wounded reputation ,
In some reclusive and religious life ,
Out of all eyes , tongues , minds , and injuries .

Signior Leonato , let the friar advise you :
And though you know my inwardness and love 
Is very much unto the prince and Claudio ,
Yet , by mine honour , I will deal in this 
As secretly and justly as your soul 
Should with your body .

Being that I flow in grief ,
The smallest twine may lead me .

'Tis well consented : presently away ;
For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure .
Come , lady , die to live : this wedding day 
Perhaps is but prolong'd : have patience and endure .


Lady Beatrice , have you wept all this while ?

Yea , and I will weep a while longer .

I will not desire that .

You have no reason ; I do it freely .

Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged .

Ah ! how much might the man deserve of me that would right her .

Is there any way to show such friendship ?

A very even way , but no such friend .

May a man do it ?

It is a man's office , but not yours .

I do love nothing in the world so well as you : is not that strange ?

As strange as the thing I know not .
It were as possible for me to say I loved nothing so well as your , but believe me not , and yet I lie not ; I confess nothing , not I deny nothing . I am sorry for my cousin .

By my sword , Beatrice , thou lovest me .

Do not swear by it , and eat it .

I will swear by it that you love me ; and I will make him eat it that says I love not you .

Will you not eat your word ?

With no sauce that can be devised to it . I protest I love thee .

Why then , God forgive me !

What offence , sweet Beatrice ?

You have stayed me in a happy hour :
I was about to protest I loved you .

And do it with all thy heart .

I love you with so much of my heart that none is left to protest .

Come , bid me do anything for thee .

Kill Claudio .

Ha ! not for the wide world .

You kill me to deny it . Farewell .

Tarry , sweet Beatrice .

I am gone , though I am here : there is no love in you : nay , I pray you , let me go .

Beatrice ,

In faith , I will go .

We'll be friends first .

You dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine enemy .

Is Claudio thine enemy ?

Is he not approved in the height a villain , that hath slandered , scorned , dishonoured my kinswoman ? O ! that I were a man . What ! bear her in hand until they come to take hands , and then , with public accusation , uncovered slander , unmitigated rancour ,O God , that I were a man ! I would eat his heart in the market-place .

Hear me , Beatrice ,

Talk with a man out at a window ! a proper saying !

Nay , but Beatrice ,

Sweet Hero ! she is wronged , she is slandered , she is undone .

Beat 

Princes and counties ! Surely , a princely testimony , a goodly Count Comfect ; a sweet gallant , surely ! O ! that I were a man for his sake , or that I had any friend would be a man for my sake ! But manhood is melted into curtsies , valour into compliment , and men are only turned into tongue , and trim ones too : he is now as valiant as Hercules , that only tells a lie and swears it . I cannot be a man with wishing , therefore I will die a woman with grieving .

Tarry , good Beatrice . By this hand , I love thee .

Use it for my love some other way than swearing by it .

Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath wronged Hero ?

Yea , as sure as I have a thought or a soul .

Enough ! I am engaged , I will challenge him . I will kiss your hand , and so leave you . By this hand , Claudio shall render me a dear account . As you hear of me , so think of me . Go , comfort your cousin : I must say she is dead ; and so , farewell .


Is our whole dissembly appeared ?

O ! a stool and a cushion for the sexton .

Which be the malefactors ?

Marry , that am I and my partner .

Nay , that's certain : we have the exhibition to examine .

But which are the offenders that are to be examined ? let them come before Master constable .

Yea , marry , let them come before me .
What is your name , friend ?

Borachio .

Pray write down Borachio . Yours , sirrah ?

I am a gentleman , sir , and my name is Conrade .

Write down Master gentleman Conrade . Masters , do you serve God ?

Yea , sir , we hope .

Yea , sir , we hope .

Write down that they hope they serve God : and write God first ; for God defend but God should go before such villains ! Masters , it is proved already that you are little better than false knaves , and it will go near to be thought so shortly . How answer you for yourselves ?

Marry , sir , we say we are none .

A marvellous witty fellow , I assure you ; but I will go about with him . Come you hither , sirrah ; a word in your ear : sir , I say to you , it is thought you are false knaves .

Sir , I say to you we are none .

Well , stand aside . 'Fore God , they are both in a tale . Have you writ down , that they are none ?

Master constable , you go not the way to examine : you must call forth the watch that are their accusers .

Yea , marry , that's the eftest way . Let the watch come forth . Masters , I charge you , in the prince's name , accuse these men .

This man said , sir , that Don John , the prince's brother , was a villain .

Write down Prince John a villain .
Why , this is flat perjury , to call a prince's brother villain .

Master constable ,

Pray thee , fellow , peace : I do not like thy look , I promise thee .

What heard you him say else ?

Marry , that he had received a thousand ducats of Don John for accusing the Lady Hero wrongfully .

Flat burglary as ever was committed .

Yea , by the mass , that it is .

What else , fellow ?

And that Count Claudio did mean , upon his words , to disgrace Hero before the whole assembly , and not marry her .

O villain ! thou wilt be condemned into everlasting redemption for this .

What else ?

This is all .

And this is more , masters , than you can deny . Prince John is this morning secretly stolen away : Hero was in this manner accused , in this very manner refused , and , upon the grief of this , suddenly died . Master constable , let these men be bound , and brought to Leonato's : I will go before and show him their examination .


Come , let them be opinioned .

Let them be in the hands 

Off , coxcomb !

God's my life ! where's the sexton ? let him write down the prince's officer coxcomb . Come , bind them . Thou naughty varlet !

Away ! you are an ass ; you are an ass .

Dost thou not suspect my place ? Dost thou not suspect my years ? O that he were here to write me down an ass ! but , masters , remember that I am an ass ; though it be not written down , yet forget not that I am an ass . No , thou villain , thou art full of piety , as shall be proved upon thee by good witness . I am a wise fellow ; and , which is more , an officer ; and , which is more , a householder ; and , which is more , as pretty a piece of flesh as any in Messina ; and one that knows the law , go to ; and a rich fellow enough , go to ; and a fellow that hath had losses ; and one that hath two gowns , and everything handsome about him . Bring him away . O that I had been writ down an ass !

If you go on thus , you will kill yourself ;
And 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief 
Against yourself .

I pray thee , cease thy counsel ,
Which falls into mine ears as profitless 
As water in a sieve : give not me counsel ;
Nor let no comforter delight mine ear 
But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine :
Bring me a father that so lov'd his child ,
Whose joy of her is overwhelm'd like mine ,
And bid him speak of patience ;
Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine ,
And let it answer every strain for strain ,
As thus for thus and such a grief for such ,
In every lineament , branch , shape , and form :
If such a one will smile , and stroke his beard ;
Bid sorrow wag , cry 'hem' when he should groan ,
Patch grief with proverbs ; make misfortune drunk 
With candle-wasters ; bring him yet to me ,
And I of him will gather patience .
But there is no such man ; for , brother , men 
Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief 
Which they themselves not feel ; but , tasting it ,
Their counsel turns to passion , which before 
Would give preceptial medicine to rage ,
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread ,
Charm ache with air and agony with words .
No , no ; 'tis all men's office to speak patience 
To those that wring under the load of sorrow ,
But no man's virtue nor sufficiency 
To be so moral when he shall endure 
The like himself . Therefore give me no counsel :
My griefs cry louder than advertisement .

Therein do men from children nothing differ .

I pray thee , peace ! I will be flesh and blood ;
For there was never yet philosopher 
That could endure the toothache patiently ,
However they have writ the style of gods 
And made a push at chance and sufferance .

Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself ;
Make those that do offend you suffer too .

There thou speak'st reason : nay , I will do so .
My soul doth tell me Hero is belied ;
And that shall Claudio know ; so shall the prince ,
And all of them that thus dishonour her .

Here come the prince and Claudio hastily .


Good den , good den .

Good day to both of you .

Hear you , my lords ,

We have some haste , Leonato .

Some haste , my lord ! well , fare you well , my lord :
Are you so hasty now ?well , all is one .

Nay , do not quarrel with us , good old man .

If he could right himself with quarrelling ,
Some of us would lie low .

Who wrongs him ?

Marry , thou dost wrong me ; thou dissembler , thou .
Nay , never lay thy hand upon thy sword ;
I fear thee not .

Marry , beshrew my hand ,
If it should give your age such cause of fear .
In faith , my hand meant nothing to my sword .

Tush , tush , man ! never fleer and jest at me :
I speak not like a dotard nor a fool ,
As , under privilege of age , to brag 
What I have done being young , or what would do ,
Were I not old . Know , Claudio , to thy head ,
Thou hast so wrong'd mine innocent child and me 
That I am forc'd to lay my reverence by ,
And , with grey hairs and bruise of many days ,
Do challenge thee to trial of a man .
I say thou hast belied mine innocent child :
Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart ,
And she lies buried with her ancestors ;
O ! in a tomb where never scandal slept ,
Save this of hers , fram'd by thy villany !

My villany ?

Thine , Claudio ; thine , I say .

You say not right , old man .

My lord , my lord ,
I'll prove it on his body , if he dare ,
Despite his nice fence and his active practice ,
His May of youth and bloom of lustihood .

Away ! I will not have to do with you .

Canst thou so daff me ? Thou hast kill'd my child ;
If thou kill'st me , boy , thou shalt kill a man .

He shall kill two of us , and men indeed :
But that's no matter ; let him kill one first :
Win me and wear me ; let him answer me .
Come , follow me , boy ; come , sir boy , come , follow me .
Sir boy , I'll whip you from your foining fence ;
Nay , as I am a gentleman , I will .

Brother ,

Content yourself . God knows I lov'd my niece ;
And she is dead , slander'd to death by villains ,
That dare as well answer a man indeed 
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue .
Boys , apes , braggarts , Jacks , milksops !

Brother Antony ,

Hold you content . What , man ! I know them , yea ,
And what they weigh , even to the utmost scruple ,
Scrambling , out-facing , fashion-monging boys ,
That lie and cog and flout , deprave and slander ,
Go antickly , show outward hideousness ,
And speak off half a dozen dangerous words ,
How they might hurt their enemies , if they durst ;
And this is all !

But , brother Antony ,

Come , 'tis no matter :
Do not you meddle , let me deal in this .

Gentlemen both , we will not wake your patience .
My heart is sorry for your daughter's death ;
But , on my honour , she was charg'd with nothing 
But what was true and very full of proof .

My lord , my lord 

I will not hear you .

No ?
Come , brother , away . I will be heard .

And shall , or some of us will smart for it .

See , see ; here comes the man we went to seek .

Now , signior , what news ?

Good day , my lord .

Welcome , signior : you are almost come to part almost a fray .

We had like to have had our two noses snapped off with two old men without teeth .

Leonato and his brother . What thinkest thou ? Had we fought , I doubt we should have been too young for them .

In a false quarrel there is no true valour . I came to seek you both .

We have been up and down to seek thee ; for we are high-proof melancholy , and would fain have it beaten away . Wilt thou use thy wit ?

It is in my scabbard ; shall I draw it ?

Dost thou wear thy wit by thy side ?

Never any did so , though very many have been beside their wit . I will bid thee draw , as we do the minstrels ; draw , to pleasure us .

As I am an honest man , he looks pale . Art thou sick , or angry ?

What , courage , man ! What though care killed a cat , thou hast mettle enough in thee to kill care .

Sir , I shall meet your wit in the career , an you charge it against me . I pray you choose another subject .

Nay then , give him another staff : this last was broke cross .

By this light , he changes more and more : I think he be angry indeed .

If he be , he knows how to turn his girdle .

Shall I speak a word in your ear ?

God bless me from a challenge !

You are a villain ; I jest not : I will make it good how you dare , with what you dare , and when you dare . Do me right , or I will protest your cowardice . You have killed a sweet lady , and her death shall fall heavy on you . Let me hear from you .

Well I will meet you , so I may have good cheer .

What , a feast , a feast ?

I' faith , I thank him ; he hath bid me to a calf's-head and a capon , the which if I do not carve most curiously , say my knife's naught .
Shall I not find a woodcock too ?

Sir , your wit ambles well ; it goes easily .

I'll tell thee how Beatrice praised thy wit the other day . I said , thou hadst a fine wit . 'True ,' says she , 'a fine little one .' 'No ,' said I , 'a great wit .' 'Right ,' said she , 'a great gross one .' 'Nay ,' said I , 'a good wit .' 'Just ,' said she , 'it hurts nobody .' 'Nay ,' said I , 'the gentleman is wise .' 'Certain ,' said she , 'a wise gentleman .' 'Nay ,' said I , 'he hath the tongues .' 'That I believe ,' said she . 'for he swore a thing to me on Monday night , which he forswore on Tuesday morning : there's a double tongue ; there's two tongues .' Thus did she , an hour together , trans-shape thy particular virtues ; yet at last she concluded with a sigh , thou wast the properest man in Italy .

For the which she wept heartily and said she cared not .

Yea , that she did ; but yet , for all that , an if she did not hate him deadly , she would love him dearly . The old man's daughter told us all .

All , all ; and moreover , God saw him when he was hid in the garden .

But when shall we set the savage bull's horns on the sensible Benedick's head ?

Yea , and text underneath , 'Here dwells Benedick the married man !' 

Fare you well , boy : you know my mind . I will leave you now to your gossip-like humour : you break jests as braggarts do their blades , which , God be thanked , hurt not . My lord , for your many courtesies I thank you : I must discontinue your company . Your brother the bastard is fled from Messina : you have , among you , killed a sweet and innocent lady . For my Lord Lack-beard there , he and I shall meet ; and till then , peace be with him .


He is in earnest .

In most profound earnest ; and , I'll warrant you , for the love of Beatrice .

And hath challenged thee ?

Most sincerely .

What a pretty thing man is when he goes in his doublet and hose and leaves off his wit !

He is then a giant to an ape ; but then is an ape a doctor to such a man .

But , soft you ; let me be : pluck up , my heart , and be sad ! Did he not say my brother was fled ?


Come , you , sir : if justice cannot tame you , she shall ne'er weigh more reasons in her balance . Nay , an you be a cursing hypocrite once , you must be looked to .

How now ! two of my brother's men bound ! Borachio , one !

Hearken after their offence , my lord .

Officers , what offence have these men done ?

Marry , sir , they have committed false report ; moreover , they have spoken untruths ; secondarily , they are slanders ; sixth and lastly , they have belied a lady ; thirdly , they have verified unjust things ; and to conclude , they are lying knaves .

First , I ask thee what they have done ; thirdly , I ask thee what's their offence ; sixth and lastly , why they are committed ; and , to conclude , what you lay to their charge ?

Rightly reasoned , and in his own division ; and , by my troth , there's one meaning well suited .

Who have you offended , masters , that you are thus bound to your answer ? this learned constable is too cunning to be understood . What's your offence ?

Sweet prince , let me go no further to mine answer : do you hear me , and let this count kill me . I have deceived even your very eyes : what your wisdoms could not discover , these shallow fools have brought to light ; who , in the night overheard me confessing to this man how Don John your brother incensed me to slander the Lady Hero ; how you were brought into the orchard and saw me court Margaret in Hero's garments ; how you disgraced her , when you should marry her . My villany they have upon record ; which I had rather seal with my death than repeat over to my shame . The lady is dead upon mine and my master's false accusation ; and , briefly , I desire nothing but the reward of a villain .

Runs not this speech like iron through your blood ?

I have drunk poison whiles he utter'd it .

But did my brother set thee on to this ?

Yea ; and paid me richly for the practice of it .

He is compos'd and fram'd of treachery :
And fled he is upon this villany .

Sweet Hero ! now thy image doth appear 
In the rare semblance that I lov'd it first .

Come , bring away the plaintiffs : by this time our sexton hath reformed Signior Leonato of the matter . And masters , do not forget to specify , when time and place shall serve , that I am an ass .

Here , here comes Master Signior Leonato , and the sexton too .


Which is the villain ? Let me see his eyes ,
That , when I note another man like him ,
I may avoid him . Which of these is he ?

If you would know your wronger , look on me .

Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast kill'd 
Mine innocent child ?

Yea , even I alone .

No , not so , villain ; thou beliest thyself :
Here stand a pair of honourable men ;
A third is fled , that had a hand in it .
I thank you , princes , for my daughter's death 
Record it with your high and worthy deeds .
'Twas bravely done , if you bethink you of it .

I know not how to pray your patience ;
Yet I must speak . Choose your revenge yourself ;
Impose me to what penance your invention 
Can lay upon my sin : yet sinn'd I not 
But in mistaking .

By my soul , nor I :
And yet , to satisfy this good old man ,
I would bend under any heavy weight 
That he'll enjoin me to .

I cannot bid you bid my daughter live ;
That were impossible : but , I pray you both ,
Possess the people in Messina here 
How innocent she died ; and if your love 
Can labour aught in sad invention ,
Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb ,
And sing it to her bones : sing it to-night .
To-morrow morning come you to my house ,
And since you could not be my son-in-law ,
Be yet my nephew . My brother hath a daughter ,
Almost the copy of my child that's dead ,
And she alone is heir to both of us :
Give her the right you should have given her cousin ,
And so dies my revenge .

O noble sir ,
Your over-kindness doth wring tears from me !
I do embrace your offer ; and dispose 
For henceforth of poor Claudio .

To-morrow then I will expect your coming ;
To-night I take my leave . This naughty man 
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret ,
Who , I believe , was pack'd in all this wrong ,
Hir'd to it by your brother .

No , by my soul she was not ;
Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me ;
But always hath been just and virtuous 
In anything that I do know by her .

Moreover , sir ,which , indeed , is not under white and black ,this plaintiff here , the offender , did call me ass : I beseech you , let it be remembered in his punishment . And also , the watch heard them talk of one Deformed : they say he wears a key in his ear and a lock hanging by it , and borrows money in God's name , the which he hath used so long and never paid , that now men grow hard-hearted , and will lend nothing for God's sake . Pray you , examine him upon that point .

I thank thee for thy care and honest pains .

Your worship speaks like a most thankful and reverend youth , and I praise God for you .

There's for thy pains .

God save the foundation !

Go , I discharge thee of thy prisoner , and I thank thee .

I leave an arrant knave with your worship ; which I beseech your worship to corect yourself , for the example of others . God keep your worship ! I wish your worship well ; God restore you to health ! I humbly give you leave to depart , and if a merry meeting may be wished , God prohibit it ! Come , neighbour .


Until to-morrow morning , lords , farewell .

Farewell , my lords : we look for you to-morrow .

We will not fail .

To-night I'll mourn with Hero .


Bring you these fellows on . We'll talk with Margaret ,
How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow .


Pray thee , sweet Mistress Margaret , deserve well at my hands by helping me to the speech of Beatrice .

Will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty ?

In so high a style , Margaret , that no man living shall come over it ; for , in most comely truth , thou deservest it .

To have no man come over me ! why , shall I always keep below stairs ?

Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound's mouth ; it catches .

And yours as blunt as the fencer's foils , which hit , but hurt not .

A most manly wit , Margaret ; it will not hurt a woman : and so , I pray thee , call Beatrice . I give thee the bucklers .

Give us the swords , we have bucklers of our own .

If you use them , Margaret , you must put in the pikes with a vice ; and they are dangerous weapons for maids .

Well , I will call Beatrice to you , who I think hath legs .

And therefore will come .


The god of love ,
That sits above ,
And knows me , and knows me ,
How pitiful I deserve ,

I mean , in singing ; but in loving , Leander the good swimmer , Troilus the first employer of pandars , and a whole book full of these quondam carpet-mongers , whose names yet run smoothly in the even road of a blank verse , why , they were never so truly turned over and over as my poor self , in love . Marry , I cannot show it in rime ; I have tried : I can find out no rime to 'lady' but 'baby ,' an innocent rime ; for 'scorn ,' 'horn ,' a hard rime ; for 'school ,' 'fool ,' a babbling rime ; very ominous endings : no , I was not born under a riming planet , nor I cannot woo in festival terms .

Sweet Beatrice , wouldst thou come when I called thee ?

Yea , signior ; and depart when you bid me .

O , stay but till then !

'Then' is spoken ; fare you well now : and yet , ere I go , let me go with that I came for ; which is , with knowing what hath passed between you and Claudio .

Only foul words ; and thereupon I will kiss thee .

Foul words is but foul wind , and foul wind is but foul breath , and foul breath is noisome ; therefore I will depart unkissed .

Thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense , so forcible is thy wit . But I must tell thee plainly , Claudio undergoes my challenge , and either I must shortly hear from him , or I will subscribe him a coward . And , I pray thee now , tell me , for which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love with me ?

For them all together ; which maintained so politic a state of evil that they will not admit any good part to intermingle with them . But for which of my good parts did you first suffer love for me ?

'Suffer love ,' a good epithet ! I do suffer love indeed , for I love thee against my will .

In spite of your heart , I think . Alas , poor heart ! If you spite it for my sake , I will spite it for yours ; for I will never love that which my friend hates .

Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably .

It appears not in this confession : there's not one wise man among twenty that will praise himself .

An old , an old instance , Beatrice , that lived in the time of good neighbours . If a man do not erect in this age his own tomb ere he dies , he shall live no longer in monument than the bell rings and the widow weeps .

And how long is that think you ?

Question : why , an hour in clamour and a quarter in rheum : therefore it is most expedient for the wise ,if Don Worm , his conscience , find no impediment to the contrary ,to be the trumpet of his own virtues , as I am to myself . So much for praising myself , who , I myself will bear witness , is praiseworthy . And now tell me , how doth your cousin ?

Very ill .

And how do you ?

Very ill too .

Serve God , love me , and mend . There will I leave you too , for here comes one in haste .


Madam , you must come to your uncle . Yonder's old coil at home : it is proved , my Lady Hero hath been falsely accused , the prince and Claudio mightily abused ; and Don John is the author of all , who is fled and gone . Will you come presently ?

Will you go hear this news , signior ?

I will live in thy heart , die in thy lap , and be buried in thy eyes ; and moreover I will go with thee to thy uncle's .


Is this the monument of Leonato ?

It is , my lord .

Done to death by slanderous tongues 
Was the Hero that here lies :
Death , in guerdon of her wrongs ,
Gives her fame which never dies .
So the life that died with shame 
Lives in doath with glorious fame .

Hang thou there upon the tomb ,
Praising her when I am dumb .
Now , music , sound , and sing your solemn hymn .

Pardon , goddess of the night ,
Those that slew thy virgin knight ;
For the which , with songs of woe ,
Round about her tomb they go .
Midnight , assist our moan ;
Help us to sigh and groan ,
Heavily , heavily :
Graves , yawn and yield your dead ,
Till death be uttered ,
Heavily , heavily .

Now , unto thy bones good night !
Yearly will I do this rite .

Good morrow , masters : put your torches out .
The wolves have prey'd ; and look , the gentle day ,
Before the wheels of Ph bus , round about 
Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey .
Thanks to you all , and leave us : fare you well 

Good morrow , masters : each his several way .

Come , let us hence , and put on other weeds ;
And then to Leonato's we will go .

And Hymen now with luckier issue speed's ,
Than this for whom we render'd up this woe !


Did I not tell you she was innocent ?

So are the prince and Claudio , who accus'd her 
Upon the error that you heard debated :
But Margaret was in some fault for this ,
Although against her will , as it appears 
In the true course of all the question .

Well , I am glad that all things sort so well .

And so am I , being else by faith enforc'd 
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it .

Well , daughter , and you gentlewomen all ,
Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves ,
And when I send for you , come hither mask'd :
The prince and Claudio promis'd by this hour 
To visit me .

You know your office , brother ;
You must be father to your brother's daughter ,
And give her to young Claudio .

Which I will do with confirm'd countenance .

Friar , I must entreat your pains , I think .

To do what , signior ?

To bind me , or undo me ; one of them .
Signior Leonato , truth it is , good signior ,
Your niece regards me with an eye of favour .

That eye my daughter lent her : 'tis most true .

And I do with an eye of love requite her .

The sight whereof I think , you had from me ,
From Claudio , and the prince . But what's your will ?

Your answer , sir , is enigmatical :
But , for my will , my will is your good will 
May stand with ours , this day to be conjoin'd 
In the state of honourable marriage :
In which , good friar , I shall desire your help .

My heart is with your liking .

And my help .
Here come the prince and Claudio .


Good morrow to this fair assembly .

Good morrow , prince ; good morrow , Claudio :
We here attend you . Are you yet determin'd 
To-day to marry with my brother's daughter ?

I'll hold my mind , were she an Ethiop .

Call her forth , brother : here's the friar ready .


Good morrow , Benedick . Why , what's the matter ,
That you have such a February face ,
So full of frost , of storm and cloudiness ?

I think he thinks upon the savage bull .
Tush ! fear not , man , we'll tip thy horns with gold ,
And all Europa shall rejoice at thee ,
As once Europa did at lusty Jove ,
When he would play the noble beast in love .

Bull Jove , sir , had an amiable low :
And some such strange bull leap'd your father's cow ,
And got a calf in that same noble feat ,
Much like to you , for you have just his bleat .

For this I owe you : here come other reckonings .

Which is the lady I must seize upon ?

This same is she , and I do give you her .

Why , then she's mine . Sweet , let me see your face .

No , that you shall not , till you take her hand 
Before this friar , and swear to marry her .

Give me your hand : before this holy friar ,
I am your husband , if you like of me .

And when I liv'd , I was your other wife :

And when you lov'd , you were my other husband .

Another Hero !

Nothing certainer :
One Hero died defil'd , but I do live ,
And surely as I live , I am a maid .

The former Hero ! Hero that is dead !

She died , my lord , but whiles her slander liv'd .

All this amazement can I qualify :
When after that the holy rites are ended ,
I'll tell you largely of fair Hero's death :
Meantime , let wonder seem familiar ,
And to the chapel let us presently .

Soft and fair , friar . Which is Beatrice ?

I answer to that name . What is your will ?

Do not you love me ?

Why , no ; no more than reason .

Why , then , your uncle and the prince and Claudio 
Have been deceived ; for they swore you did .

Do not you love me ?

Troth , no ; no more than reason .

Why , then , my cousin , Margaret , and Ursula ,
Are much deceiv'd ; for they did swear you did .

They swore that you were almost sick for me .

They swore that you were well-nigh dead for me .

'Tis no such matter . Then , you do not love me ?

No , truly , but in friendly recompense .

Come , cousin , I am sure you love the gentleman .

And I'll be sworn upon 't that he loves her ;
For here's a paper written in his hand ,
A halting sonnet of his own pure brain ,
Fashion'd to Beatrice .

And here's another ,
Writ in my cousin's hand , stolen from her pocket ,
Containing her affection unto Benedick .

A miracle ! here's our own hands against our hearts . Come , I will have thee ; but , by this light , I take thee for pity .

I would not deny you ; but , by this good day , I yield upon great persuasion , and partly to save your life , for I was told you were in a consumption .

Peace ! I will stop your mouth .


How dost thou , Benedick , the married man ?

I'll tell thee what , prince ; a college of witcrackers cannot flout me out of my humour . Dost thou think I care for a satire or an epigram ? No ; if a man will be beaten with brains , a' shall wear nothing handsome about him . In brief , since I do purpose to marry , I will think nothing to any purpose that the world can say against it ; and therefore never flout at me for what I have said against it , for man is a giddy thing , and this is my conclusion . For thy part , Claudio , I did think to have beaten thee ; but , in that thou art like to be my kinsman , live unbruised , and love my cousin .

I had well hoped thou wouldst have denied Beatrice , that I might have cudgelled thee out of thy single life , to make thee a double-dealer ; which , out of question , thou wilt be , if my cousin do not look exceeding narrowly to thee .

Come , come , we are friends . Let's have a dance ere we are married , that we may lighten our own hearts and our wives' heels .

We'll have dancing afterward .

First , of my word ; therefore play , music ! Prince , thou art sad ; get thee a wife , get thee a wife : there is no staff more reverend than one tipped with horn .


My lord , your brother John is ta'en in flight ,
And brought with armed men back to Messina .

Think not on him till to-morrow : I'll devise thee brave punishments for him . Strike up , pipers !

PERICLES, PRINCE OF TYRE

 
To sing a song that old was sung ,
From ashes ancient Gower is come ,
Assuming man's infirmities ,
To glad your ear , and please your eyes .
It hath been sung at festivals ,
On ember-eves , and holy-ales ;
And lords and ladies in their lives 
Have read it for restoratives :
The purchase is to make men glorious ;
Et bonum quo antiquius , eo melius .
If you , born in these latter times ,
When wit's more ripe , accept my rimes ,
And that to hear an old man sing 
May to your wishes pleasure bring ,
I life would wish , and that I might 
Waste it for you like taper-light .
This Antioch , then , Antiochus the Great 
Built up , this city , for his chiefest seat ,
The fairest in all Syria ,
I tell you what mine authors say :
This king unto him took a fere ,
Who died and left a female heir ,
So buxom , blithe , and full of face 
As heaven had lent her all his grace ;
With whom the father liking took ,
And her to incest did provoke .
Bad child , worse father ! to entice his own 
To evil should be done by none .
By custom what they did begin 
Was with long use account no sin .
The beauty of this sinful dame 
Made many princes thither frame ,
To seek her as a bed-fellow ,
In marriage-pleasures play-fellow :
Which to prevent , he made a law ,
To keep her still , and men in awe ,
That whoso ask'd her for his wife ,
His riddle told not , lost his life :
So for her many a wight did die ,
As yon grim looks do testify .
What now ensues , to the judgment of your eye 
I give , my cause who best can justify .


Young Prince of Tyre , you have at large receiv'd 
The danger of the task you undertake .

I have , Antiochus , and , with a soul 
Embolden'd with the glory of her praise ,
Think death no hazard in this enterprise .

Bring in our daughter , clothed like a bride ,
For the embracements even of Jove himself ;
At whose conception , till Lucina reign'd ,
Nature this dowry gave , to glad her presence ,
The senate-house of planets all did sit ,
To knit in her their best perfections .

See , where she comes apparell'd like the spring ,
Graces her subjects , and her thoughts the king 
Of every virtue gives renown to men !
Her face the book of praises , where is read 
Nothing but curious pleasures , as from thence 
Sorrow were ever raz'd , and testy wrath 
Could never be her mild companion .
You gods , that made me man , and sway in love ,
That hath inflam'd desire in my breast 
To taste the fruit of you celestial tree 
Or die in the adventure , be my helps ,
As I am son and servant to your will ,
To compass such a boundless happiness !

Prince Pericles ,

That would be son to great Antiochus .

Before thee stands this fair Hesperides ,
With golden fruit , but dangerous to be touch'd ;
For death-like dragons here affright thee hard :
Her face , like heaven , enticeth thee to view 
Her countless glory , which desert must gain ;
And which , without desert , because thine eye 
Presumes to reach , all thy whole heap must die .
Yon sometime famous princes , like thyself ,
Drawn by report , adventurous by desire ,
Tell thee with speechless tongues and semblance pale ,
That without covering , save yon field of stars ,
They here stand martyrs , slain in Cupid's wars ;
And with dead cheeks advise thee to desist 
For going on death's net , whom none resist .

Antiochus , I thank thee , who hath taught 
My frail mortality to know itself ,
And by those fearful objects to prepare 
This body , like to them , to what I must ;
For death remember'd should be like a mirror ,
Who tells us life's but breath , to trust it error .
I'll make my will then ; and as sick men do ,
Who know the world , see heaven , but feeling woe ,
Gripe not at earthly joys as erst they did :
So I bequeath a happy peace to you 
And all good men , as every prince should do ;
My riches to the earth from whence they came ,

But my unspotted fire of love to you .
Thus ready for the way of life or death ,
I wait the sharpest blow .

Scorning advice , read the conclusion then ;
Which read and not expounded , 'tis decreed ,
As these before thee thou thyself shalt bleed .

Of all say'd yet , mayst thou prove prosperous !
Of all say'd yet , I wish thee happiness !

Like a bold champion , I assume the lists ,
Nor ask advice of any other thought 
But faithfulness and courage .

I am no viper , yet I feed 
On mother's flesh which did me breed ;
I sought a husband , in which labour 
I found that kindness in a father .
He's father , son , and husband mild ,
I mother , wife , and yet his child .
How they may be , and yet in two ,
As you will live , resolve it you .

Sharp physic is the last : but , O you powers !
That give heaven countless eyes to view men's acts ,
Why cloud they not their sights perpetually ,
If this be true , which makes me pale to read it ?
Fair glass of light , I lov'd you , and could still ,
Were not this glorious casket stor'd with ill :
But I must tell you now my thoughts revolt ;
For he's no man on whom perfections wait 
That , knowing sin within , will touch the gate .
You're a fair viol , and your sense the strings ,
Who , finger'd to make men his lawful music ,
Would draw heaven down and all the gods to hearken ;
But being play'd upon before your time ,
Hell only danceth at so harsh a chime .
Good sooth , I care not for you .

Prince Pericles , touch not , upon thy life ,
For that's an article within our law ,
As dangerous as the rest . Your time's expir'd :
Either expound now or receive your sentence .

Great king ,
Few love to hear the sins they love to act ;
'Twould braid yourself too near for me to tell it .
Who has a book of all that monarchs do ,
He's more secure to keep it shut than shown ;
For vice repeated is like the wandering wind ,
Blows dust in others' eyes , to spread itself ;
And yet the end of all is bought thus dear ,
The breath is gone , and the sore eyes see clear 
To stop the air would hurt them . The blind mole casts 
Copp'd hills towards heaven , to tell the earth is throng'd 
By man's oppression ; and the poor worm doth die for 't .
Kings are earth's gods ; in vice their law's their will ;
And if Jove stray , who dares say Jove doth ill ?
It is enough you know ; and it is fit ,
What being more known grows worse , to smother it .
All love the womb that their first being bred ,
Then give my tongue like leave to love my head .

Heaven ! that I had thy head ; he has found the meaning ;
But I will gloze with him . Young Prince of Tyre ,
Though by the tenour of our strict edict ,
Your exposition misinterpreting ,
We might proceed to cancel of your days ;
Yet hope , succeeding from so fair a tree 
As your fair self , doth tune us otherwise :
Forty days longer we do respite you ;
If by which time our secret be undone ,
This mercy shows we'll joy in such a son :
And until then your entertain shall be 
As doth befit our honour and your worth .


How courtesy would seem to cover sin ,
When what is done is like a hypocrite ,
The which is good in nothing but in sight !
If it be true that I interpret false ,
Then were it certain you were not so bad 
As with foul incest to abuse your soul ;
Where now you're both a father and a son ,
By your untimely claspings with your child ,
Which pleasure fits a husband , not a father ;
And she an eater of her mother's flesh ,
By the defiling of her parent's bed ;
And both like serpents are , who though they feed 
On sweetest flowers , yet they poison breed .
Antioch , farewell ! for wisdom sees , those men 
Blush not in actions blacker than the night ,
Will shun no course to keep them from the light .
One sin , I know , another doth provoke ;
Murder's as near to lust as flame to smoke .
Poison and treason are the hands of sin ,
Ay , and the targets , to put off the shame :
Then , lest my life be cropp'd to keep you clear ,
By flight I'll shun the danger which I fear .

He hath found the meaning , for which we mean 
To take his head .
He must not live to trumpet forth my infamy ,
Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sin 
In such a loathed manner ;
And therefore instantly this prince must die ,
For by his fall my honour must keep high .
Who attends us there ?


Doth your highness call ?

Thaliard ,
You're of our chamber , and our mind partakes 
Her private actions to your secrecy ;
And for your faithfulness we will advance you .
Thaliard , behold , here's poison , and here's gold ;
We hate the Prince of Tyre , and thou must kill him :
It fits thee not to ask the reason why ,
Because we bid it . Say , is it done ?

My lord , 'tis done .

Enough .

Let your breath cool yourself , telling your haste .

My lord , Prince Pericles is fled .


As thou 
Wilt live , fly after ; and , as an arrow shot 
From a well-experienc'd archer hits the mark 
His eye doth level at , so thou ne'er return 
Unless thou say 'Prince Pericles is dead .' 

My lord ,
If I can get him within my pistol's length ,
I'll make him sure enough : so , farewell to your highness .

Thaliard , adieu !

Till Pericles be dead ,
My heart can lend no succour to my head .


Let none disturb us .
Why should this change of thoughts ,
The sad companion , dull-ey'd melancholy ,
Be my so us'd a guest , as not an hour 
In the day's glorious walk or peaceful night 
The tomb where grief should sleep can breed me quiet ?
Here pleasures court mine eyes , and mine eyes shun them ,
And danger , which I feared , is at Antioch ,
Whose arm seems far too short to hit me here ;
Yet neither pleasure's art can joy my spirits ,
Nor yet the other's distance comfort me .
Then it is thus : the passions of the mind ,
That have their first conception by mis-dread ,
Have after-nourishment and life by care ;
And what was first but fear what might be done ,
Grows elder now and cares it be not done .
And so with me : the great Antiochus ,
'Gainst whom I am too little to contend ,
Since he's so great can make his will his act ,
Will think me speaking , though I swear to silence ;
Nor boots it me to say I honour him ,
If he suspect I may dishonour him ;
And what may make him blush in being known ,
He'll stop the course by which it might be known .
With hostile forces he'll o'erspread the land ,
And with the ostent of war will look so huge ,
Amazement shall drive courage from the state ,
Our men be vanquish'd ere they do resist ,
And subjects punish'd that ne'er thought offence :
Which care of them , not pity of myself ,
Who am no more but as the tops of trees ,
Which fence the roots they grow by and defend them ,
Make both my body pine and soul to languish ,
And punish that before that he would punish .


Joy and all comfort in your sacred breast !

And keep your mind , till you return to us ,
Peaceful and comfortable .

Peace , peace ! and give experience tongue .
They do abuse the king that flatter him ;
For flattery is the bellows blows up sin ;
The thing the which is flatter'd , but a spark ,
To which that blast gives heat and stronger glowing ;
Whereas reproof , obedient and in order ,
Fits kings , as they are men , for they may err :
When Signior Sooth here does proclaim a peace ,
He flatters you , makes war upon your life .
Prince , pardon me , or strike me , if you please ;
I cannot be much lower than my knees .

All leave us else ; but let your cares o'erlook 
What shipping and what lading's in our haven ,
And then return to us .

Helicanus , thou 
Hast mov'd us ; what seest thou in our looks ?

An angry brow , dread lord .

If there be such a dart in prince's frowns ,
How durst thy tongue move anger to our face ?

How dare the plants look up to heaven , from whence 
They have their nourishment ?

Thou know'st I have power 
To take thy life from thee .

I have ground the axe myself ;
Do you but strike the blow .

Rise , prithee , rise ;
Sit down ; thou art no flatterer :
I thank thee for it ; and heaven forbid 
That kings should let their ears hear their faults hid !
Fit counsellor and servant for a prince ,
Who by thy wisdom mak'st a prince thy servant ,
What wouldst thou have me do ?

To bear with patience 
Such griefs as you yourself do lay upon yourself .

Thou speak'st like a physician , Helicanus ,
That minister'st a potion unto me 
That thou wouldst tremble to receive thyself .
Attend me then : I went to Antioch ,
Where as thou know'st , against the face of death 
I sought the purchase of a glorious beauty ,
From whence an issue I might propagate 
Are arms to princes and bring joys to subjects .
Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder ;
The rest , hark in thine ear , as black as incest ;
Which by my knowledge found , the sinful father 
Seem'd not to strike , but smooth ; but thou know'st this ,
'Tis time to fear when tyrants seem to kiss .
Which fear so grew in me I hither fled ,
Under the covering of a careful night ,
Who seem'd my good protector ; and , being here ,
Bethought me what was past , what might succeed .
I knew him tyrannous ; and tyrants' fears 
Decrease not , but grow faster than the years .
And should he doubt it , as no doubt he doth ,
That I should open to the listening air 
How many worthy princes' bloods were shed ,
To keep his bed of blackness unlaid ope ,
To lop that doubt he'll fill this land with arms ,
And make pretence of wrong that I have done him ;
When all , for mine , if I may call 't , offence ,
Must feel war's blow , who spares not innocence :
Which love to all , of which thyself art one ,
Who now reprov'st me for it ,

Alas ! sir .

Drew sleep out of mine eyes , blood from my cheeks ,
Musings into my mind , with thousand doubts 
How I might stop this tempest , ere it came ;
And finding little comfort to relieve them ,
I thought it princely charity to grieve them .

Well , my lord , since you have given me leave to speak ,
Freely will I speak . Antiochus you fear ,
And justly too , I think , you fear the tyrant ,
Who either by public war or private treason 
Will take away your life .
Therefore , my lord , go travel for a while ,
Till that his rage and anger be forgot ,
Or till the Destinies do cut his thread of life .
Your rule direct to any ; if to me ,
Day serves not light more faithful than I'll be .

I do not doubt thy faith ;
But should he wrong my liberties in my absence ?

We'll mingle our bloods together in the earth ,
From whence we had our being and our birth .

Tyre , I now look from thee then , and to Tarsus 
Intend my travel , where I'll hear from thee ,
And by whose letters I'll dispose myself .
The care I had and have of subjects' good 
On thee I'll lay , whose wisdom's strength can bear it .
I'll take thy word for faith , not ask thine oath ;
Who shuns not to break one will sure crack both .
But in our orbs we'll live so round and safe ,
That time of both this truth shall ne'er convince ,
Thou show'dst a subject's shine , I a true prince .


So this is Tyre , and this the court . Here must I kill King Pericles ; and if I do not , I am sure to be hanged at home : 'tis dangerous . Well , I perceive he was a wise fellow , and had good discretion , that , being bid to ask what he would of the king , desired he might know none of his secrets : now do I see he had some reason for it ; for if a king bid a man be a villain , he is bound by the indenture of his oath to be one . Hush ! here come the lords of Tyre .


You shall not need , my fellow peers of Tyre ,
Further to question me of your king's departure :
His seal'd commission , left in trust with me ,
Doth speak sufficiently he's gone to travel .

How ! the king gone !

If further yet you will be satisfied ,
Why , as it were unlicens'd of your loves ,
He would depart , I'll give some light unto you .
Being at Antioch 

What from Antioch ?

Royal Antiochus on what cause I know not 
Took some displeasure at him , at least he judg'd so ;
And doubting lest that he had err'd or sinn'd ,
To show his sorrow he'd correct himself ;
So puts himself unto the shipman's toil ,
With whom each minute threatens life or death .

Well , I perceive 
I shall not be hang'd now , although I would ;
But since he's gone , the king it sure must please :
He 'scap'd the land , to perish at the sea .
I'll present myself .

Peace to the lords of Tyre .

Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome .

From him I come ,
With message unto princely Pericles ;
But since my landing I have understood 
Your lord hath betook himself to unknown travels ,
My message must return from whence it came .

We have no reason to desire it ,
Commended to our master , not to us :
Yet , ere you shall depart , this we desire ,
As friends to Antioch , we may feast in Tyre .


My Dionyza , shall we rest us here ,
And by relating tales of others' griefs ,
See if 'twill teach us to forget our own ?

That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it ;
For who digs hills because they do aspire 
Throws down one mountain to cast up a higher .
O my distressed lord ! even such our griefs are ;
Here they're but felt , and seen with mischief's eyes ,
But like to groves , being topp'd , they higher rise .

O Dionyza ,
Who wanteth food , and will not say he wants it ,
Or can conceal his hunger till he famish ?
Our tongues and sorrows do sound deep 
Our woes into the air ; our eyes do weep 
Till tongues fetch breath that may proclaim them louder ;
That if heaven slumber while their creatures want ,
They may awake their helps to comfort them .
I'll then discourse our woes , felt several years ,
And wanting breath to speak help me with tears .

I'll do my best , sir .

This Tarsus , o'er which I have the government ,
A city on whom plenty held full hand ,
For riches strew'd herself even in the streets ;
Whose towers bore heads so high they kiss'd the clouds ,
And strangers ne'er beheld but wonder'd at ;
Whose men and dames so jetted and adorn'd ,
Like one another's glass to trim them by :
Their tables were stor'd full to glad the sight ,
And not so much to feed on as delight ;
All poverty was scorn'd , and pride so great ,
The name of help grew odious to repeat .

O ! 'tis too true ,

But see what heaven can do ! By this our change ,
These mouths , whom but of late earth , sea , and air 
Were all too little to content and please ,
Although they gave their creatures in abundance ,
As houses are defil'd for want of use ,
They are now starv'd for want of exercise ;
Those palates who , not yet two summers younger ,
Must have inventions to delight the taste ,
Would now be glad of bread , and beg for it ;
Those mothers who , to nousle up their babes ,
Thought nought too curious , are ready now 
To eat those little darlings whom they lov'd .
So sharp are hunger's teeth , that man and wife 
Draw lots who first shall die to lengthen life .
Here stands a lord , and there a lady weeping ;
Here many sink , yet those which see them fall 
Have scarce strength left to give them burial .
Is not this true ?

Our cheeks and hollow eyes do witness it .

O ! let those cities that of plenty's cup 
And her prosperities so largely taste ,
With their superfluous riots , hear these tears :
The misery of Tarsus may be theirs .


Where's the lord governor ?

Here .
Speak out thy sorrows which thou bring'st in haste ,
For comfort is too far for us to expect .

We have descried , upon our neighbouring shore ,
A portly sail of ships make hitherward .

I thought as much .
One sorrow never comes but brings an heir 
That may succeed as his inberitor ;
And so in ours . Some neighbouring nation ,
Taking advantage of our misery ,
Hath stuff'd these hollow vessels with their power ,
To beat us down , the which are down already ;
And make a conquest of unhappy me ,
Whereas no glory's got to overcome .

That's the least fear ; for by the semblance 
Of their white flags display'd , they bring us peace ,
And come to us as favourers , not as foes .

Thou speak'st like him 's untutor'd to repeat :
Who makes the fairest show means most deceit .
But bring they what they will and what they can ,
What need we fear ?
The ground's the lowest and we are half way there .
Go tell their general we attend him here ,
To know for what he comes , and whence he comes ,
And what he craves .

I go , my lord .


Welcome is peace if he on peace consist ;
If wars we are unable to resist .


Lord governor , for so we hear you are ,
Let not our ships and number of our men ,
Be like a beacon fir'd to amaze your eyes .
We have heard your miseries as far as Tyre ,
And seen the desolation of your streets :
Nor come we to add sorrow to your tears ,
But to relieve them of their heavy load ;
And these our ships , you happily may think 
Are like the Trojan horse was stuff'd within 
With bloody veins , expecting overthrow ,
Are stor'd with corn to make your needy bread ,
And give them life whom hunger starv'd half dead .

The gods of Greece protect you !
And we'll pray for you .

Arise , I pray you , rise :
We do not look for reverence , but for love ,
And harbourage for ourself , our ships , and men .

The which when any shall not gratify ,
Or pay you with unthankfulness in thought ,
Be it our wives , our children , or ourselves ,
The curse of heaven and men succeed their evils !
Till when the which , I hope , shall ne'er be seen 
Your Grace is welcome to our town and us .

Which welcome we'll accept ; feast here awhile ,
Until our stars that frown lend us a smile .

Here have you seen a mighty king 
His child , I wis , to incest bring ;
A better prince and benign lord ,
That will prove awful both in deed and word .
Be quiet , then , as men should be ,
Till he hath pass'd necessity .
I'll show you those in troubles reign ,
Losing a mite , a mountain gain .
The good in conversation ,
To whom I give my benison ,
Is still at Tarsus , where each man 
Thinks all is writ he speken can ;
And , to remember what he does ,
Build his statue to make him glorious :
But tidings to the contrary 
Are brought your eyes ; what need speak I ?


Good Helicane hath stay'd at home ,
Not to eat honey like a drone 
From others' labours ; for though he strive 
To killen bad , keep good alive ,
And to fulfil his prince' desire ,
Sends word of all that haps in Tyre :
How Thaliard came full bent with sin 
And had intent to murder him ;
And that in Tarsus was not best 
Longer for him to make his rest .
He , doing so , put forth to seas ,
Where when men been , there's seldom ease ;
For now the wind begins to blow ;
Thunder above and deeps below 
Make such unquiet , that the ship 
Should house him safe is wrack'd and split ;
And he , good prince , having all lost ,
By waves from coast to coast is tost .
All perishen of man , of pelf ,
Ne aught escapen but himself ;
Till Fortune , tir'd with doing bad ,
Threw him ashore , to give him glad ;
And here he comes . What shall be next ,
Pardon old Gower , this longs the text .

Yet cease your ire , you angry stars of heaven !
Wind , rain , and thunder , remember , earthly man 
Is but a substance that must yield to you ;
And I , as fits my nature , do obey you .
Alas ! the sea hath cast me on the rocks ,
Wash'd me from shore to shore , and left me breath 
Nothing to think on but ensuing death :
Let it suffice the greatness of your powers 
To have bereft a prince of all his fortunes ;
And having thrown him from your watery grave ,
Here to have death in peace is all he'll crave .


What , ho , Pilch !

Ha ! come and bring away the nets .

What , Patch-breech , I say !

What say you , master ?

Look how thou stirrest now ! come away , or I'll fetch thee with a wannion .

Faith , master , I am thinking of the poor men that were cast away before us even now .

Alas ! poor souls ; it grieved my heart to hear what pitiful cries they made to us to help them , when , well-a-day , we could scarce help ourselves .

Nay , master , said not I as much when I saw the porpus how he bounced and tumbled ? they say they're half fish half flesh ; a plague on them ! they ne'er come but I look to be washed . Master , I marvel how the fishes live in the sea .

Why , as men do a-land ; the great ones eat up the little ones ; I can compare our rich misers to nothing so fitly as to a whale ; a' plays and tumbles , driving the poor fry before him , and at last devours them all at a mouthful . Such whales have I heard on o' the land , who never leave gaping till they've swallowed the whole parish , church , steeple , bells , and all .

A pretty moral .

But master , if I had been the sexton , I would have been that day in the belfry .

Why , man ?

Because he should have swallowed me too ; and when I had been in his belly , I would have kept such a jangling of the bells , that he should never have left till he cast bells , steeple , church , and parish , up again . But if the good King Simonides were of my mind ,

Simonides !

We would purge the land of these drones , that rob the bee of her honey .

How from the finny subject of the sea 
These fishers tell the infirmities of men ;
And from their watery empire recollect 
All that may men approve or men detect !


Peace be at your labour , honest fishermen .

Honest ! good fellow , what's that ? if it be a day fits you , search out of the calendar , and nobody look after it .

Y' may see the sea hath cast me on your coast .

What a drunken knave was the sea , to cast thee in our way !

A man whom both the waters and the wind ,
In that vast tennis-court , have made the ball 
For them to play upon , entreats you pity him ;
He asks of you , that never us'd to beg .

No , friend , cannot you beg ? here's them in our country of Greece gets more with begging than we can do with working .

Canst thou catch any fishes then ?

I never practised it .

Nay then thou wilt starve , sure ; for here's nothing to be got now-a-days unless thou canst fish for 't .

What I have been I have forgot to know ,
But what I am want teaches me to think on ;
A man throng'd up with cold ; my veins are chill ,
And have no more of life than may suffice 
To give my tongue that heat to ask your help ;
Which if you shall refuse , when I am dead ,
For that I am a man , pray see me buried .

Die , quoth-a ? Now , gods forbid ! I have a gown here ; come , put it on ; keep thee warm . Now , afore me , a handsome fellow ! Come , thou shalt go home , and we'll have flesh for holidays , fish for fasting-days , and moreo'er puddings and flap-jacks ; and thou shalt be welcome .

I thank you , sir .

Hark you , my friend ; you said you could not beg .

I did but crave .

But crave ! Then I'll turn craver too , and so I shall 'scape whipping .

Why , are all your beggars whipped , then ?

O ! not all , my friend , not all ; for if all your beggars were whipped , I would wish no better office than to be beadle . But , master , I'll go draw up the net .


How well this honest mirth becomes their labour !

Hark you , sir ; do you know where ye are ?

Not well .

Why , I'll tell you : this is called Pentapolis , and our king the good Simonides .

The good King Simonides do you call him ?

Ay , sir ; and he deserves to be so called for his peaceable reign and good government .

He is a happy king , since he gains from his subjects the name of good by his government . How far is his court distant from this shore ?

Marry , sir , half a day's journey ; and I'll tell you , he hath a fair daughter , and to-morrow is her birthday ; and there are princes and knights come from all parts of the world to just and tourney for her love .

Were my fortunes equal to my desires , I could wish to make one there .

O ! sir , things must be as they may ; and what a man cannot get , he may lawfully deal for his wife's soul ,


Help , master , help ! here's a fish hangs in the net , like a poor man's right in the law ; 'twill hardly come out . Ha ! bots on 't , 'tis come at last , and 'tis turned to a rusty armour .

An armour , friends ! I pray you , let me see it .
Thanks , Fortune , yet , that after all my crosses 
Thou giv'st me somewhat to repair myself ;
And though it was mine own , part of mine heritage ,
Which my dead father did bequeath to me ,
With this strict charge , even as he left his life ,
'Keep it , my Pericles , it hath been a shield 
'Twixt me and death ;' and pointed to this brace ;
'For that it sav'd me , keep it ; in like necessity 
The which the gods protect thee from !'t may defend thee .' 
It kept where I kept , I so dearly lov'd it ;
Till the rough seas , that spare not any man ,
Took it in rage , though calm'd they have given 't again .
I thank thee for 't ; my shipwrack now 's no ill ,
Since I have here my father's gift in 's will .

What mean you , sir ?

To beg of you , kind friends , this coat of worth ,
For it was sometime target to a king ;
I know it by this mark . He lov'd me dearly ,
And for his sake I wish the having of it ;
And that you'd guide me to your sovereign's court ,
Where with it I may appear a gentleman ;
And if that ever my low fortunes better ,
I'll pay your bounties ; till then rest your debtor .

Why , wilt thou tourney for the lady ?

I'll show the virtue I have borne in arms .

Why , do'e take it ; and the gods give thee good on 't !

Ay , but hark you , my friend ; 'twas we that made up this garment through the rough seams of the water ; there are certain condolements , certain vails . I hope , sir , if you thrive , you'll remember from whence you had it .

Believe it , I will .
By your furtherance I am cloth'd in steel ;
And spite of all the rapture of the sea ,
This jewel holds his biding on my arm :
Unto thy value will I mount myself 
Upon a courser , whose delightful steps 
Shall make the gazer joy to see him tread .
Only , my friend , I yet am unprovided 
Of a pair of bases .

We'll sure provide ; thou shalt have my best gown to make thee a pair , and I'll bring thee to the court myself .

Then honour be but a goal to my will ! This day I'll rise , or else add ill to ill .

Are the knights ready to begin the triumph ?

They are , my liege ;
And stay your coming to present themselves .

Return them , we are ready ; and our daughter ,
In honour of whose birth these triumphs are ,
Sits here , like beauty's child , whom nature gat 
For men to see , and seeing wonder at .


It pleaseth you , my royal father , to express 
My commendations great , whose merit's less .

'Tis fit it should be so ; for princes are 
A model , which heaven makes like to itself :
As jewels lose their glory if neglected ,
So princes their renowns if not respected .
'Tis now your honour , daughter , to explain 
The labour of each knight in his device .

Which , to preserve mine honour , I'll perform .


Who is the first that doth prefer himself ?

A knight of Sparta , my renowned father ;
And the device he bears upon his shield 
Is a black Ethiop reaching at the sun ;
The word , Lux tua vita mihi .

He loves you well that holds his life of you .

Who is the second that presents himself ?

A prince of Macedon , my royal father ;
And the device he bears upon his shield 
Is an arm'd knight that's conquer'd by a lady ;
The motto thus , in Spanish , Piu por dulzura que por fuerza .


And what's the third ?

The third of Antioch ;
And his device , a wreath of chivalry ;
The word , Me pomp  provexit apex .


What is the fourth ?

A burning torch that's turned upside down ;
The word , Quod me alit me extinguit .

Which shows that beauty hath his power and will ,
Which can as well inflame as it can kill .


The fifth , a hand environed with clouds ,
Holding out gold that's by the touchstone tried ;
The motto thus , Sic spectanda fides .


And what 's 
The sixth and last , the which the knight himself 
With such a graceful courtesy deliver'd ?

He seems to be a stranger ; but his present is 
A wither'd branch , that's only green at top ;
The motto , In hac spe vivo .

A pretty moral ;
From the dejected state wherein he is ,
He hopes by you his fortune yet may flourish .

He had need mean better than his outward show 
Can any way speak in his just commend ;
For , by his rusty outside he appears 
To have practis'd more the whipstock than the lance .

He well may be a stranger , for he comes 
To an honour'd triumph strangely furnished .

And on set purpose let his armour rust 
Until this day , to scour it in the dust .

Opinion's but a fool , that makes us scan 
The outward habit by the inward man .
But stay , the knights are coming ; we'll withdraw 
Into the gallery .


Knights ,
To say you're welcome were superfluous .
To place upon the volume of your deeds ,
As in a title-page , your worth in arms ,
Were more than you expect , or more than's fit ,
Since every worth in show commends itself .
Prepare for mirth , for mirth becomes a feast :
You are princes and my guests .

But you , my knight and guest ;
To whom this wreath of victory I give ,
And crown you king of this day's happiness .

'Tis more by fortune , lady , than by merit .

Call it by what you will , the day is yours ;
And here , I hope , is none that envies it .
In framing an artist art hath thus decreed ,
To make some good , but others to exceed ;
And you're her labour'd scholar . Come , queen o' the feast ,
For , daughter , so you are ,here take your place ;
Marshal the rest , as they deserve their grace .

We are honour'd much by good Simonides .

Your presence glads our days ; honour we love ,
For who hates honour , hates the gods above .

Sir , yonder is your place .

Some other is more fit .

Contend not , sir ; for we are gentlemen 
That neither in our hearts nor outward eyes 
Envy the great nor do the low despise .

You are right courteous knights .

Sit , sir ; sit .

By Jove , I wonder , that is king of thoughts ,
These cates resist me , she but thought upon .

By Juno , that is queen of marriage ,
All viands that I eat do seem unsavoury ,
Wishing him my meat . Sure , he's a gallant gentleman .

He's but a country gentleman ;
He has done no more than other knights have done ;
He has broken a staff or so ; so let it pass .

To me he seems like diamond to glass .

Yon king's to me like to my father's picture ,
Which tells me in that glory once he was ;
Had princes sit , like stars , about his throne ,
And he the sun for them to reverence .
None that beheld him , but like lesser lights 
Did vail their crowns to his supremacy ;
Where now his son's like a glow-worm in the night ,
The which hath fire in darkness , none in light :
Whereby I see that Time's the king of men ;
He's both their parent , and he is their grave ,
And gives them what he will , not what they crave .

What , are you merry , knights ?

Who can be other in this royal presence ?

Here , with a cup that's stor'd unto the brim ,
As you do love , fill to your mistress' lips ,
We drink this health to you .

We thank your Grace .

Yet pause awhile ;
Yon knight doth sit too melancholy ,
As if the entertainment in our court 
Had not a show might countervail his worth .
Note it not you , Thaisa ?

What is it 
To me , my father ?

O ! attend , my daughter :
Princes in this should live like gods above ,
Who freely give to every one that comes 
To honour them ;
And princes not doing so are like to gnats ,
Which make a sound , but kill'd are wonder'd at .
Therefore to make his entrance more sweet ,
Here say we drink this standing-bowl of wine to him .

Alas ! my father , it befits not me 
Unto a stranger knight to be so bold ;
He may my proffer take for an offence ,
Since men take women's gifts for impudence .

How !
Do as I bid you , or you'll move me else .

Now , by the gods , he could not please me better .

And further tell him , we desire to know of him ,
Of whence he is , his name , and parentage .

The king , my father , sir , has drunk to you .

I thank him .

Wishing it so much blood unto your life .

I thank both him and you , and pledge him freely .

And further he desires to know of you ,
Of whence you are , your name and parentage .

A gentleman of Tyre , my name , Pericles ;
My education been in arts and arms ;
Who , looking for adventures in the world ,
Was by the rough seas reft of ships and men ,
And after shipwrack , driven upon this shore .

He thanks your Grace ; names himself Pericles ,
A gentleman of Tyre ,
Who only by misfortune of the seas 
Bereft of ships and men , cast on this shore .

Now , by the gods , I pity his misfortune ,
And will awake him from his melancholy .
Come , gentlemen , we sit too long on trifles ,
And waste the time which looks for other revels .
Even in your armours , as you are address'd ,
Will very well become a soldier's dance .
I will not have excuse , with saying this 
Loud music is too harsh for ladies' heads 
Since they love men in arms as well as beds .

So this was well ask'd , 'twas so well perform'd .
Come , sir ;
Here is a lady that wants breathing too :
And I have often heard , you knights of Tyre 
Are excellent in making ladies trip ,
And that their measures are as excellent .

In those that practise them they are , my lord .

O ! that's as much as you would be denied 
Of your fair courtesy .

Unclasp , unclasp ;
Thanks , gentlemen , to all ; all have done well ,


But you the best . Pages and lights , to conduct 
These knights unto their several lodgings ! Yours , sir ,
We have given order to be next our own .

I am at your Grace's pleasure .

Princes , it is too late to talk of love ,
And that's the mark I know you level at ;
Therefore each one betake him to his rest ;
To-morrow all for speeding do their best .


No , Escanes , know this of me ,
Antiochus from incest liv'd not free ;
For which , the most high gods not minding longer 
To withhold the vengeance that they had in store ,
Due to this heinous capital offence ,
Even in the height and pride of all his glory ,
When he was seated in a chariot 
Of an inestimable value , and his daughter with him ,
A fire from heaven came and shrivell'd up 
Their bodies , even to loathing ; for they so stunk ,
That all those eyes ador'd them ere their fall 
Scorn now their hand should give them burial .

'Twas very strange .

And yet but just ; for though 
This king were great , his greatness was no guard 
To bar heaven's shaft , but sin had his reward .

'Tis very true .


See , not a man in private conference 
Or council has respect with him but he .

It shall no longer grieve without reproof .

And curs'd be he that will not second it .

Follow me then . Lord Helicane , a word .

With me ? and welcome . Happy day , my lords .

Know that our griefs are risen to the top ,
And now at length they overflow their banks .

Your griefs ! for what ? wrong not the prince you love .

Wrong not yourself then , noble Helicane ;
But if the prince do live , let us salute him ,
Or know what ground's made happy by his breath .
If in the world he live , we'll seek him out ;
If in his grave he rest , we'll find him there ;
And be resolv'd he lives to govern us ,
Or dead , give 's cause to mourn his funeral ,
And leaves us to our free election .

Whose death's indeed the strongest in our censure :
And knowing this kingdom is without a head ,
Like goodly buildings left without a roof 
Soon fall to ruin , your noble self ,
That best know'st how to rule and how to reign ,
We thus submit unto , our sovereign .

Live , noble Helicane !

For honour's cause forbear your suffrages :
If that you love Prince Pericles , forbear .
Take I your wish , I leap into the seas ,
Where's hourly trouble for a minute's ease .
A twelvemonth longer , let me entreat you 
To forbear the absence of your king ;
If in which time expir'd he not return ,
I shall with aged patience bear your yoke .
But if I cannot win you to this love ,
Go search like nobles , like noble subjects ,
And in your search spend your adventurous worth ;
Whom if you find , and win unto return ,
You shall like diamonds sit about his crown .

To wisdom he's a fool that will not yield ;
And since Lord Helicane enjoineth us ,
We with our travels will endeavour it .

Then you love us , we you , and we'll clasp hands :
When peers thus knit , a kingdom ever stands .


Good morrow to the good Simonides .

Knights , from my daughter this I let you know ,
That for this twelvemonth she'll not undertake 
A married life .
Her reason to herself is only known ,
Which yet from her by no means can I get .

May we not get access to her , my lord ?

Faith , by no means ; she hath so strictly tied 
Her to her chamber that 'tis impossible .
One twelve moons more she'll wear Diana's livery ;
This by the eye of Cynthia hath she vow'd ,
And on her virgin honour will not break it .

Though loath to bid farewell , we take our leaves .


So ,
They're well dispatch'd ; now to my daughter's letter .
She tells me here , she'll wed the stranger knight ,
Or never more to view nor day nor light .
'Tis well , mistress ; your choice agrees with mine ;
I like that well : how absolute she's in 't ,
Not minding whether I dislike or no !
Well , I do commend her choice ;
And will no longer have it be delay'd .
Soft ! here he comes : I must dissemble it .


All fortune to the good Simonides !

To you as much , sir ! I am beholding to you 
For your sweet music this last night : I do 
Protest my ears were never better fed 
With such delightful pleasing harmony 

It is your Grace's pleasure to commend ,
Not my desert .

Sir , you are music's master .

The worst of all her scholars , my good lord .

Let me ask you one thing .
What do you think of my daughter , sir ?

A most virtuous princess .

And she is fair too , is she not ?

As a fair day in summer ; wondrous fair .

My daughter , sir , thinks very well of you ;
Ay , so well , that you must be her master ,
And she will be your scholar : therefore look to it .

I am unworthy for her schoolmaster .

She thinks not so ; peruse this writing else .

What's here ?
A letter that she loves the knight of Tyre !
'Tis the king's subtilty to have my life .
O ! seek not to entrap me , gracious lord ,
A stranger and distressed gentleman ,
That never aim'd so high to love your daughter ,
But bent all offices to honour her .

Thou hast bewitch'd my daughter , and thou art 
A villain .

By the gods , I have not :
Never did thought of mine levy offence ;
Nor never did my actions yet commence 
A deed might gain her love or your displeasure .

Traitor , thou liest .

Traitor !

Ay , traitor .

Even in his throat , unless it be the king ,
That calls me traitor , I return the lie .

Now , by the gods , I do applaud his courage .

My actions are as noble as my thoughts ,
That never relish'd of a base descent .
I came unto your court for honour's cause ,
And not to be a rebel to her state ;
And he that otherwise accounts of me ,
This sword shall prove he's honour's enemy .

No ?
Here comes my daughter , she can witness it .


Then , as you are as virtuous as fair ,
Resolve your angry father , if my tongue 
Did e'er solicit , or my hand subscribe 
To any syllable that made love to you .

Why , sir , say if you had ,
Who takes offence at that would make me glad ?

Yea , mistress , are you so peremptory ?


I am glad on 't , with all my heart .
I'll tame you ; I'll bring you in subjection .
Will you , not having my consent ,
Bestow your love and your affections 
Upon a stranger ?

who , for aught I know ,
May be , nor can I think the contrary ,
As great in blood as I myself .


Therefore , hear you , mistress ; either frame 
Your will to mine ; and you , sir , hear you ,
Either be rul'd by me , or I will make you 
Man and wife :
Nay , come , your hands and lips must seal it too ;
And being join'd , I'll thus your hopes destroy ;
And for a further grief ,God give you joy !
What ! are you both pleas'd ?

Yes , if you love me , sir .

Even as my life , or blood that fosters it .

What ! are you both agreed ?

Yes , if 't please your majesty .

Yes , if 't please your majesty .

It pleaseth me so well , that I will see you wed ;
Then with what haste you can get you to bed .

Now sleep yslaked hath the rout ;
No din but snores the house about ,
Made louder by the o'er-fed breast 
Of this most pompous marriage-feast .
The cat , with eyne of burning coal ,
Now couches fore the mouse's hole ;
And crickets sing at the oven's mouth ,
E'er the blither for their drouth .
Hymen hath brought the bride to bed ,
Where , by the loss of maidenhead ,
A babe is moulded . Be attent ;
And time that is so briefly spent 
With your fine fancies quaintly eche ;
What's dumb in show I'll plain with speech .


By many a dern and painful perch ,
Of Pericles the careful search 
By the four opposing coigns ,
Which the world together joins ,
Is made with all due diligence 
That horse and sail and high expense ,
Can stead the quest . At last from Tyre ,
Fame answering the most strange inquire 
To the court of King Simonides 
Are letters brought , the tenour these :
Antiochus and his daughter dead ;
The men of Tyrus on the head 
Of Helicanus would set on 
The crown of Tyre , but he will none :
The mutiny he there hastes t' oppress ;
Says to 'em , if King Pericles 
Come not home in twice six moons ,
He , obedient to their dooms ,
Will take the crown . The sum of this ,
Brought hither to Pentapolis ,
Yravished the regions round ,
And every one with claps can sound ,
'Our heir-apparent is a king !
Who dream'd , who thought of such a thing ?' 
Brief , he must hence depart to Tyre :
His queen , with child , makes her desire ,
Which who shall cross ?along to go ;
Omit we all their dole and woe :
Lychorida , her nurse , she takes ,
And so to sea . Their vessel shakes 
On Neptune's billow ; half the flood 
Hath their keel cut : but Fortune's mood 
Varies again ; the grisled north 
Disgorges such a tempest forth ,
That , as a duck for life that dives ,
So up and down the poor ship drives .
The lady shrieks , and well-a-near 
Does fall in travail with her fear ;
And what ensues in this fell storm 
Shall for itself itself perform .
I nill relate , action may 
Conveniently the rest convey ,
Which might not what by me is told .
In your imagination hold 
This stage the ship , upon whose deck 
The sea-tost Pericles appears to speak .

Thou God of this great vast , rebuke these surges ,
Which wash both heaven and hell ; and thou , that hast 
Upon the winds command , bind them in brass ,
Having call'd them from the deep . O ! still 
Thy deafening , dreadful thunders ; gently quench 
Thy nimble , sulphurous flashes . O ! how Lychorida ,
How does my queen ? Thou stormest venomously ;
Wilt thou spit all thyself ? The seaman's whistle 
Is as a whisper in the ears of death ,
Unheard . Lychorida ! Lucina , O !
Divinest patroness , and midwife gentle 
To those that cry by night , convey thy deity 
Aboard our dancing boat ; make swift the pangs 
Of my queen's travails !

Now , Lychorida !

Here is a thing too young for such a place ,
Who , if it had conceit , would die , as I 
Am like to do : take in your arms this piece 
Of your dead queen .

How , how , Lychorida !

Patience , good sir ; do not assist the storm .
Here's all that is left living of your queen ,
A little daughter : for the sake of it ,
Be manly , and take comfort .

O you gods !
Why do you make us love your goodly gifts ,
And snatch them straight away ? We here below ,
Recall not what we give , and therein may 
Use honour with you .

Patience , good sir ,
Even for this charge .

Now , mild may be thy life !
For a more blust'rous birth had never babe :
Quiet and gentle thy conditions !
For thou art the rudeliest welcome to this world 
That e'er was prince's child . Happy what follows !
Thou hast as chiding a nativity 
As fire , air , water , earth , and heaven can make ,
To herald thee from the womb ; even at the first 
Thy loss is more than can thy portage quit ,
With all thou canst find here . Now , the good gods 
Throw their best eyes upon 't !


What courage , sir ? God save you !

Courage enough . I do not fear the flaw ;
It hath done to me the worst . Yet for the love 
Of this poor infant , this fresh-new sea-farer ,
I would it would be quiet .

Slack the bolins there ! thou wilt not , wilt thou ? Blow , and split thyself .

But sea-room , an the brine and cloudy billow kiss the moon , I care not .

Sir , you queen must overboard : the sea works high , the wind is loud , and will not lie till the ship be cleared of the dead .

That's your superstition .

Pardon us , sir ; with us at sea it hath been still observed , and we are strong in custom . Therefore briefly yield her , for she must overboard straight .

As you think meet . Most wretched queen !

Here she lies , sir .

A terrible child-bed hast thou had , my dear ;
No light , no fire : the unfriendly elements 
Forgot thee utterly ; nor have I time 
To give thee hallow'd to thy grave , but straight 
Must cast thee , scarcely coffin'd , in the ooze ;
Where , for a monument upon thy bones ,
And aye-remaining lamps , the belching whale 
And humming water must o'erwhelm thy corpse ,
Lying with simple shells ! O Lychorida !
Bid Nestor bring me spices , ink and paper ,
My casket and my jewels ; and bid Nicander 
Bring me the satin coffer : lay the babe 
Upon the pillow . Hie thee , whiles I say 
A priestly farewell to her : suddenly , woman .


Sir , we have a chest beneath the hatches , caulk'd and bitumed ready .

I thank thee . Mariner , say what coast is this ?

We are near Tarsus .

Thither , gentle mariner ,
Alter thy course for Tyre . When canst thou reach it ?

By break of day , if the wind cease .

O ! make for Tarsus .
There will I visit Cleon , for the babe 
Cannot hold out to Tyrus ; there I'll leave it 
At careful nursing . Go thy ways , good mariner ;
I'll bring the body presently .


Philemon , ho !


Doth my lord call ?

Get fire and meat for these poor men ;
'T has been a turbulent and stormy night .

I have been in many ; but such a night as this 
Till now I ne'er endur'd .

Your master will be dead ere you return ;
There's nothing can be minister'd to nature 
That can recover him .

Give this to the 'pothecary ,
And tell me how it works .

Good morrow , sir .

Good morrow to your lordship .

Gentlemen ,
Why do you stir so early ?

Sir ,
Our lodgings , standing bleak upon the sea ,
Shook as the earth' did quake ;
The very principals did seem to rend ,
And all to topple . Pure surprise and fear 
Made me to quit the house .

That is the cause we trouble you so early ;
'Tis not our husbandry .

O ! you say well .

But I much marvel that your lordship , having 
Rich tire about you , should at these early hours 
Shake off the golden slumber of repose .
'Tis most strange ,
Nature should be so conversant with pain ,
Being thereto not compell'd .

I hold it ever ,
Virtue and cunning were endowments greater 
Than nobleness and riches ; careless heirs 
May the two latter darken and expend ,
But immortality attends the former ,
Making a man a god . 'Tis known I ever 
Have studied physic , through which secret art ,
By turning o'er authorities , I have 
Together with my practice made familiar 
To me and to my aid the blest infusions 
That dwell in vegetives , in metals , stones ;
And can speak of the disturbances 
That nature works , and of her cures ; which doth give me 
A more content in course of true delight 
Than to be thirsty after tottering honour ,
Or tie my treasure up in silken bags ,
To please the fool and death .

Your honour has through Ephesus pour'd forth 
Your charity , and hundreds call themselves 
Your creatures , who by you have been restor'd :
And not your knowledge , your personal pain , but even 
Your purse , still open , hath built Lord Cerimon 
Such strong renown as time shall ne'er decay .


So ; lift there .

What is that ?

Sir , even now 
Did the sea toss upon our shore this chest :
'Tis of some wrack .

Set it down ; let's look upon 't .

'Tis like a coffin , sir .

Whate'er it be ,
'Tis wondrous heavy . Wrench it open straight ;
If the sea's stomach be o'ercharg'd with gold ,
'Tis a good constraint of fortune it belches upon us .

'Tis so , my lord .

How close 'tis caulk'd and bitumed !
Did the sea cast it up ?

I never saw so huge a billow , sir ,
As toss'd it upon shore .

Come , wrench it open .
Soft ! it smells most sweetly in my sense .

A delicate odour .

As ever hit my nostril . So , up with it .
O you most potent gods ! what's here ? a corse !

Most strange !

Shrouded in cloth of state ; balm'd and entreasur'd 
With full bags of spices ! A passport too !
Apollo , perfect me i' the characters !

Here I give to understand ,
If e'er this coffin drive a-land ,
I , King Pericles , have lost 
This queen worth all our mundane cost .
Who finds her , give her burying ;
She was the daughter of a king :
Besides this treasure for a fee ,
The gods requite his charity !

If thou liv'st , Pericles , thou hast a heart 
That even cracks for woe ! This chanc'd to-night .

Most likely , sir .

Nay , certainly to-night ;
For look , how fresh she looks . They were too rough 
That threw her in the sea . Make fire within ;
Fetch hither all the boxes in my closet .

Death may usurp on nature many hours ,
And yet the fire of life kindle again 
The overpress'd spirits . I heard 
Of an Egyptian , that had nine hours lien dead ,
Who was by good appliances recovered .


Well said , well said ; the fire and cloths .
The rough and woeful music that we have ,
Cause it to sound , beseech you .
The viol once more ;how thou stirr'st , thou block !
The music there ! I pray you , give her air .
Gentlemen ,
This queen will live ; nature awakes , a warmth 
Breathes out of her ; she hath not been entranc'd 
Above five hours . See ! how she 'gins to blow 

Into life's flower again .

The heavens 
Through you increase our wonder and set up 
Your fame for ever .

She is alive ! behold ,
Her eyelids , cases to those heavenly jewels 
Which Pericles hath lost ,
Begin to part their fringes of bright gold ;
The diamonds of a most praised water 
Do appear , to make the world twice rich . Live ,
And make us weep to hear your fate , fair creature ,
Rare as you seem to be !


O dear Diana !
Where am I ? Where's my lord ? What world is this ?

Is not this strange ?

Most rare .

Hush , gentle neighbours !
Lend me your hands ; to the next chamber bear her .
Get linen ; now this matter must be look'd to ,
For her relapse is mortal , Come , come ;
And  sculapius guide us !


Most honour'd Cleon , I must needs be gone ;
My twelve months are expir'd , and Tyrus stands 
In a litigious peace . You and your lady 
Take from my heart all thankfulness ; the gods 
Make up the rest upon you !

Your shafts of fortune , though they hurt you mortally ,
Yet glance full wanderingly on us .

O your sweet queen !
That the strict fates had pleas'd you had brought her hither ,
To have bless'd mine eyes with her !

We cannot but obey 
The powers above us . Could I rage and roar 
As doth the sea she lies in , yet the end 
Must be as 'tis . My gentle babe Marina whom ,
For she was born at sea , I have nam'd so here 
I charge your charity withal , and leave her 
The infant of your care , beseeching you 
To give her princely training , that she may be 
Manner'd as she is born .

Fear not , my lord , but think 
Your Grace , that fed my country with your corn 
For which the people's prayers still fall upon you 
Must in your child be thought on . If neglection 
Should therein make me vile , the common body ,
By you reliev'd , would force me to my duty ;
But if to that my nature need a spur ,
The gods revenge it upon me and mine ,
To the end of generation !

I believe you ;
Your honour and your goodness teach me to 't ,
Without your vows . Till she be married , madam ,
By bright Diana , whom we honour , all 
Unscissar'd shall this hair of mine remain ,
Though I show ill in 't . So I take my leave .
Good madam , make me blessed in your care 
In bringing up my child .

I have one myself ,
Who shall not be more dear to my respect 
Than yours , my lord .

Madam , my thanks and prayers .

We'll bring your Grace e'en to the edge o' the shore ;
Then give you up to the mask'd Neptune and 
The gentlest winds of heaven .

I will embrace 
Your offer . Come , dearest madam . O ! no tears ,
Lychorida , no tears :
Look to your little mistress , on whose grace 
You may depend hereafter . Come , my lord .


Madam , this letter , and some certain jewels ,
Lay with you in your coffer ; which are now 
At your command . Know you the character ?

It is my lord's .
That I was shipp'd at sea , I well remember ,
Even on my eaning time ; but whether there 
Deliver'd , by the holy gods ,
I cannot rightly say . But since King Pericles ,
My wedded lord , I ne'er shall see again ,
A vestal livery will I take me to ,
And never more have joy .

Madam , if this you purpose as you speak ,
Diana's temple is not distant far ,
Where you may abide till your date expire .
Moreover , if you please , a niece of mine 
Shall there attend you .

My recompense is thanks , that's all ;
Yet my good will is great , though the gift small .

Imagine Pericles arriv'd at Tyre ,
Welcom'd and settled to his own desire .
His woeful queen we leave at Ephesus ,
Unto Diana there a votaress .
Now to Marina bend your mind ,
Whom our fast-growing scene must find 
At Tarsus , and by Cleon train'd 
In music , letters ; who hath gain'd 
Of education all the grace ,
Which makes her bath the heart and places 
Of general wonder . But , alack !
That monster envy , oft the wrack 
Of earned praise , Marina's life 
Seeks to take off by treason's knife .
And in this kind hath our Cleon 
One daughter , and a wench full grown ,
Even ripe for marriage-rite ; this maid 
Hight Philoten , and it is said 
For certain in our story , she 
Would ever with Marina be :
Be 't when she weav'd the sleided silk 
With fingers , long , small , white as milk ,
Or when she would with sharp neeld wound 
The cambric , which she made more sound 
By hurting it ; when to the lute 
She sung , and made the night-bird mute ,
That still records with moan ; or when 
She would with rich and constant pen 
Vail to her mistress Dian ; still 
This Philoten contends in skill 
With absolute Marina : so 
With the dove of Paphos might the crow 
Vie feathers white . Marina gets 
All praises , which are paid as debts ,
And not as given . This so darks 
In Philoten all graceful marks ,
That Cleon's wife , with envy rare ,
A present murderer does prepare 
For good Marina , that her daughter 
Might stand peerless by this slaughter .
The sooner her vile thoughts to stead ,
Lychorida , our nurse , is dead :
And cursed Dionyza hath 
The pregnant instrument of wrath 
Prest for this blow . The unborn event 
I do commend to your content :
Only I carry winged time 
Post on the lame feet of my rime ;
Which never could I so convey ,
Unless your thoughts went on my way .
Dionyza doth appear ,
With Leonine , a murderer .


Thy oath remember ; thou hast sworn to do 't :
'Tis but a blow , which never shall be known .
Thou canst not do a thing i' the world so soon ,
To yield thee so much profit . Let not conscience ,
Which is but cold , inflaming love i' thy bosom ,
Inflame too nicely ; nor let pity , which 
Even women have cast off , melt thee , but he 
A soldier to thy purpose .

I'll do 't ; but yet she is a goodly creature .

The fitter , then , the gods should have her . Here 
She comes weeping for her only mistress' death .
Thou art resolv'd ?

I am resolv'd .


No , I will rob Tellus of her weed ,
To strew thy green with flowers ; the yellows , blues ,
The purple violets , and marigolds ,
Shall as a carpet hang upon thy grave ,
While summer days do last . Ay me ! poor maid ,
Born in a tempest , when my mother died ,
This world to me is like a lasting storm ,
Whirring me from my friends .

How now , Marina ! why do you keep alone ?
How chance my daughter is not with you ? Do not 
Consume your blood with sorrowing ; you have 
A nurse of me . Lord ! how your favour's chang'd 
With this unprofitable woe . Come ,
Give me your flowers , ere the sea mar it .
Walk with Leonine ; the air is quick there ,
And it pierces and sharpens the stomach . Come ,
Leonine , take her by the arm , walk with her .

No , I pray you ;
I'll not bereave you of your servant .

Come , come ;
I love the king your father , and yourself ,
With more than foreign heart . We every day 
Expect him here ; when he shall come and find 
Our paragon to all reports thus blasted ,
He will repent the breadth of his great voyage ;
Blame both my lord and me , that we have taken 
No care to your best courses . Go , I pray you ;
Walk , and be cheerful once again ; reserve 
That excellent complexion , which did steal 
The eyes of young and old . Care not for me ;
I can go home alone .

Well , I will go ;
But yet I have no desire to it .

Come , come , I know 'tis good for you .
Walk half an hour , Leonine , at least .
Remember what I have said .

I warrant you , madam .

I'll leave you , my sweet lady , for a while ;
Pray you walk softly , do not heat your blood :
What ! I must have care of you .

My thanks , sweet madam .

Is this wind westerly that blows ?

South-west .

When I was born , the wind was north .

Was 't so ?

My father , as nurse said , did never fear ,
But cried 'Good seamen !' to the sailors , galling 
His kingly hands haling ropes ;
And , clasping to the mast , endur'd a sea 
That almost burst the deck .

When was this ?

When I was born :
Never were waves nor wind more violent ;
And from the ladder-tackle washes off 
A canvas-climber . 'Ha !' says one , 'wilt out ?' 
And with a dropping industry they skip 
From stem to stern ; the boatswain whistles , and 
The master calls , and trebles their confusion .

Come ; say your prayers .

What mean you ?

If you require a little space for prayer ,
I grant it . Pray ; but be not tedious ,
For the gods are quick of ear , and I am sworn 
To do my work with haste .

Why will you kill me ?

To satisfy my lady .

Why would she have me kill'd ?
Now , as I can remember , by my troth ,
I never did her hurt in all my life .
I never spake bad word , nor did ill turn 
To any living creature ; believe me , la ,
I never kill'd a mouse , nor hurt a fly ;
I trod upon a worm against my will ,
But I wept for it . How have I offended ,
Wherein my death might yield her any profit ,
Or my life imply her any danger ?

My commission 
Is not to reason of the deed , but do 't .

You will not do 't for all the world , I hope .
You are well favour'd , and your looks foreshow 
You have a gentle heart . I saw you lately ,
When you caught hurt in parting two that fought ;
Good sooth , it show'd well in you ; do so now ;
Your lady seeks my life ; come you between ,
And save poor me , the weaker .

I am sworn ,
And will dispatch .


Hold , villain !


A prize ! a prize !

Half-part , mates , half-part .
Come , let's have her aboard suddenly .

These roguing thieves serve the great pirate Valdes ;
And they have seiz'd Marina . Let her go ;
There's no hope she'll return . I'll swear she's dead ,
And thrown into the sea . But I'll see further ;
Perhaps they will but please themselves upon her ,
Not carry her aboard . If she remain ,
Whom they have ravish'd must by me be slain .


Boult .

Sir ?

Search the market narrowly ; Mitylene is full of gallants ; we lost too much money this mart by being too wenchless .

We were never so much out of creatures . We have but poor three , and they can do no more than they can do ; and they with continual action are even as good as rotten .

Therefore , let's have fresh ones , whate'er we pay for them . If there be not a conscience to be used in every trade , we shall never prosper .

Thou sayst true ; 'tis not the bringing up of poor bastards , as , I think , I have brought up some eleven 

Ay , to eleven ; and brought them down again . But shall I search the market ?

What else , man ? The stuff we have a strong wind will blow it to pieces , they are so pitifully sodden .

Thou sayst true ; they're too unwholesome , o' conscience . The poor Transylvanian is dead , that lay with the little baggage .

Ay , she quickly pooped him ; she made him roast-meat for worms . But I'll go search the market .


Three or four thousand chequins were as pretty a proportion to live quietly , and so give over .

Why to give over , I pray you ? is it a shame to get when we are old ?

O ! our credit comes not in like the commodity , nor the commodity wages not with the danger ; therefore , if in our youths we could pick up some pretty estate , 'twere not amiss to keep our door hatched . Besides , the sore terms we stand upon with the gods will be strong with us for giving over .

Come , other sorts offend as well as we .

As well as we ! ay , and better too ; we offend worse . Neither is our profession any trade ; it's no calling . But here comes Boult .


Come your ways . My masters , you say she's a virgin ?

O ! sir , we doubt it not .

Master , I have gone through for this piece , you see : if you like her , so ; if not , I have lost my earnest .

Boult , has she any qualities ?

She has a good face , speaks well , and has excellent good clothes ; there's no further necessity of qualities can make her be refused .

What's her price , Boult ?

I cannot be bated one doit of a thousand pieces .

Well , follow me , my masters , you shall have your money presently . Wife , take her in ; instruct her what she has to do , that she may not be raw in her entertainment .


Boult , take you the marks of her , the colour of her hair , complexion , height , age , with warrant of her virginity ; and cry , 'He that will give most , shall have her first .' Such a maiden-head were no cheap thing , if men were as they have been . Get this done as I command you .

Performance shall follow .


Alack ! that Leonine was so slack , so slow .
He should have struck , not spoke ; or that these pirates 
Not enough barbarous had not o'erboard thrown me 
For to seek my mother !

Why lament you , pretty one ?

That I am pretty .

Come , the gods have done their part in you .

I accuse them not .

You are lit into my hands , where you are like to live .

The more my fault 
To 'scape his hands where I was like to die .

Ay , and you shall live in pleasure .

No .

Yes , indeed , shall you , and taste gentlemen of all fashions . You shall fare well ; you shall have the difference of all complexions . What ! do you stop your ears ?

Are you a woman ?

What would you have me be , an I be not a woman ?

An honest woman , or not a woman .

Marry , whip thee , gosling ; I think I shall have something to do with you . Come , you are a young foolish sapling , and must be bowed as I would have you .

The gods defend me !

If it please the gods to defend you by men , then men must comfort you , men must feed you , men must stir you up . Boult's returned .

Now , sir , hast thou cried her through the market ?

I have cried her almost to the number of her hairs ; I have drawn her picture with my voice .

And I prithee , tell me , how dost thou find the inclination of the people , especially of the younger sort ?

Faith , they listened to me , as they would have hearkened to their father's testament . There was a Spaniard's mouth so watered , that he went to bed to her very description .

We shall have him here to-morrow with his best ruff on .

To-night , to-night . But , mistress , do you know the French knight that cowers i' the hams ?

Who ? Monsieur Veroles ?

Ay ; he offered to cut a caper at the proclamation ; but he made a groan at it , and swore he would see her to-morrow .

Well , well ; as for him , he brought his disease hither : here he does but repair it . I know he will come in our shadow , to scatter his crowns in the sun .

Well , if we had of every nation a traveller , we should lodge them with this sign .

Pray you , come hither awhile . You have fortunes coming upon you . Mark me : you must seem to do that fearfully , which you commit willingly ; to despise profit where you have most gain . To weep that you live as ye do makes pity in your lovers ; seldom but that pity begets you a good opinion , and that opinion a mere profit .

I understand you not .

O ! take her home , mistress , take her home ; these blushes of hers must be quenched with some present practice .

Thou sayst true , i' faith , so they must ; for your bride goes to that with shame which is her way to go with warrant .

Faith , some do , and some do not . But , mistress , if I have bargained for the joint ,

Thou mayst cut a morsel off the spit .

I may so ?

Who should deny it ? Come , young one , I like the manner of your garments well .

Ay , by my faith , they shall not be changed yet .

Boult , spend thou that in the town ; report what a sojourner we have ; you'll lose nothing by custom . When nature framed this piece , she meant thee a good turn ; therefore say what a paragon she is , and thou hast the harvest out of thine own report .

I warrant you , mistress , thunder shall not so awake the beds of eels as my giving out her beauty stir up the lewdly-inclined . I'll bring home some to-night .

Come your ways ; follow me .

If fires be hot , knives sharp , or waters deep ,
Untied I still my virgin knot will keep .
Diana , aid my purpose !

What have we to do with Diana ?
Pray you , will you go with us ?


Why , are you foolish ? Can it be undone ?

O Dionyza ! such a piece of slaughter 
The sun and moon ne'er look'd upon .

I think 
You'll turn a child again .

Were I chief lord of all this spacious world ,
I'd give it to undo the deed . O lady !
Much less in blood than virtue , yet a princess 
To equal any single crown o' the earth 
I' the justice of compare . O villain Leonine !
Whom thou hast poison'd too ;
If thou hadst drunk to him 't had been a kindness 
Becoming well thy fact ; what canst thou say 
When noble Pericles shall demand his child ?

That she is dead . Nurses are not the fates ,
To foster it , nor ever to preserve .
She died at night ; I'll say so . Who can cross it ?
Unless you play the pious innocent ,
And for an honest attribute cry out 
'She died by foul play .' 

O ! go to . Well , well ,
Of all the faults beneath the heavens , the gods 
Do like this worst .

Be one of those that think 
The pretty wrens of Tarsus will fly hence ,
And open this to Pericles . I do shame 
To think of what a noble strain you are ,
And of how coward a spirit .

To such proceeding 
Who ever but his approbation added ,
Though not his prime consent , he did not flow 
From honourable sources .

Be it so , then ;
Yet none does know but you how she came dead ,
Nor none can know , Leonine being gone .
She did distain my child , and stood between 
Her and her fortunes ; none would look on her ,
But cast their gazes on Marina's face ,
Whilst ours was blurted at and held a malkin 
Not worth the time of day . It pierc'd me thorough ;
And though you call my course unnatural ,
You not your child well loving , yet I find 
It greets me as an enterprise of kindness 
Perform'd to your sole daughter .

Heavens forgive it !

And as for Pericles ,
What should he say ? We wept after her hearse ,
And even yet we mourn ; her monument 
Is almost finish'd , and her epitaphs 
In glittering golden characters express 
A general praise to her , and care in us 
At whose expense 'tis done .

Thou art like the harpy ,
Which , to betray , dost with thine angel's face ,
Seize with thine eagle's talons .

You are like one that superstitiously 
Doth swear to the gods that winter kills the flies ;
But yet I know you'll do as I advise .

Thus time we waste , and longest leagues make short ;
Sail seas in cockles , have an wish but for 't ;
Making to take your imagination 
From bourn to bourn , region to region .
By you being pardon'd , we commit no crime 
To use one language in each several clime 
Where our scenes seem to live . I do beseech you 
To learn of me , who stand i' the gaps to teach you ,
The stages of our story . Pericles 
Is now again thwarting the wayward seas ,
Attended on by many a lord and knight ,
To see his daughter , all his life's delight .
Old Helicanus goes along . Behind 
Is left to govern it , you bear in mind ,
Old Escanes , whom Helicanus late 
Advanc'd in time to great and high estate .
Well-sailing ships and bounteous winds have brought 
This king to Tarsus , think his pilot thought ,
So with his steerage shall your thoughts grow on ,
To fetch his daughter home , who first is gone .
Like motes and shadows see them move awhile ;
Your ears unto your eyes I'll reconcile .


See how belief may suffer by foul show !
This borrow'd passion stands for true old woe ;
And Pericles , in sorrow all devour'd ,
With sighs shot through , and biggest tears o'ershower'd ,
Leaves Tarsus and again embarks . He swears 
Never to wash his face , nor cut his hairs ;
He puts on sackcloth , and to sea . He bears 
A tempest , which his mortal vessel tears ,
And yet he rides it out . Now please you wit 
The epitaph is for Marina writ 
By wicked Dionyza .


the fairest , sweet'st , and best lies here ,
who wither'd in her spring of year :
she was of tyrus the king's daughter ,
on whom foul death hath made this slaughter .
marina was she call'd ; and at her birth ,
thetis , being proud , swallow'd some part o' the earth :
therefore the earth , fearing to be o'erflow'd ,
hath thetis' birth-child on the heavens bestow'd :
wherefore she does , and swears she'll never stint ,
make raging battery upon shores of flint .

No visor does become black villany 
So well as soft and tender flattery .
Let Pericles believe his daughter's dead ,
And bear his courses to be ordered 
By Lady Fortune ; while our scene must play 
His daughter's woe and heavy well-a-day 
In her unholy service . Patience then ,
And think you now are all in Mitylen .


Did you ever hear the like ?

No , nor never shall do in such a place as this , she being once gone .

But to have divinity preached there ! did you ever dream of such a thing ?

No , no . Come , I am for no more bawdy-houses . Shall's go hear the vestals sing ?

I'll do any thing now that is virtuous ; but I am out of the road of rutting for ever .


Well , I had rather than twice the worth of her she had ne'er come here .

Fie , fie upon her ! she is able to freeze the god Priapus , and undo a whole generation ; we must either get her ravished , or be rid of her . When she should do for clients her fitment , and do me the kindness of our profession , she has me her quirks , her reasons , her master-reasons , her prayers , her knees ; that she would make a puritan of the devil if he should cheapen a kiss of her .

Faith , I must ravish her , or she'll disfurnish us of all our cavaliers , and make all our swearers priests .

Now , the pox upon her green-sickness for me !

Faith , there's no way to be rid on 't but by the way to the pox . Here comes the Lord Lysimachus , disguised .

We should have both lord and lown if the peevish baggage would but give way to customers .


How now ! How a dozen of virginities ?

Now , the gods to-bless your honour !

I am glad to see your honour in good health .

You may so ; 'tis the better for you that your resorters stand upon sound legs . How now ! wholesome iniquity , have you that a man may deal withal , and defy the surgeon ?

We have here one , sir , if she would but there never came her like in Mitylene .

If she'd do the deed of darkness , thou wouldst say .

Your honour knows what 'tis to say well enough .

Well ; call forth , call forth .

For flesh and blood , sir , white and red , you shall see a rose ; and she were a rose indeed if she had but 

What , prithee ?

O ! sir , I can be modest .

That dignifies the renown of a bawd no less than it gives a good report to a number to be chaste .


Here comes that which grows to the stalk ; never plucked yet , I can assure you .

Is she not a fair creature ?

Faith , she would serve after a long voyage at sea . Well , there's for you ; leave us .

I beseech your honour , give me leave ; a word , and I'll have done presently .

I beseech you do .

First , I would have you note , this is an honourable man .

I desire to find him so , that I may worthily note him .

Next , he's the governor of this country , and a man whom I am bound to .

If he govern the country , you are bound to him indeed ; but how honourable he is in that I know not .

Pray you , without any more virginal fencing , will you use him kindly ? He will line your apron with gold .

What he will do graciously , I will thankfully receive .

Ha' you done ?

My lord , she's not paced yet ; you must take some pains to work her to your manage . Come , we will leave his honour and her together .

Go thy ways .

Now , pretty one , how long have you been at this trade ?

What trade , sir ?

Why , I cannot name 't but I shall offend .

I cannot be offended with my trade . Please you to name it .

How long have you been of this profession ?

E'er since I can remember .

Did you go to 't so young ? Were you a gamester at five or at seven ?

Earlier too , sir , if now I be one .

Why , the house you dwell in proclaims you to be a creature of sale .

Do you know this house to be a place of such resort , and will come into 't ? I hear say you are of honourable parts , and are the governor of this place .

Why , hath your principal made known unto you who I am ?

Who is my principal ?

Why , your herb-woman ; she that sets seeds and roots of shame and iniquity . O ! you have heard something of my power , and so stand aloof for more serious wooing . But I protest to thee , pretty one , my authority shall not see thee , or else look friendly upon thee . Come , bring me to some private place ; come , come .

If you were born to honour , show it now ;
If put upon you , make the judgment good 
That thought you worthy of it .

How's this ? how's this ? Some more ; be sage .

For me ,
That am a maid , though most ungentle fortune 
Hath plac'd me in this sty , where , since I came ,
Diseases have been sold dearer than physic ,
O ! that the gods 
Would set me free from this unhallow'd place ,
Though they did change me to the meanest bird 
That flies i' the purer air !

I did not think 
Thou couldst have spoke so well ; ne'er dream'd thou couldst .
Had I brought hither a corrupted mind ,
Thy speech had alter'd it . Hold , here's gold for thee ;
Persever in that clear way thou goest ,
And the gods strengthen thee !

The good gods preserve you !

For me , be you thoughten 
That I came with no ill intent , for to me 
The very doors and windows savour vilely .
Farewell . Thou art a piece of virtue , and 
I doubt not but thy training hath been noble .
Hold , here's more gold for thee .
A curse upon him , die he like a thief ,
That robs thee of thy goodness ! If thou dost 
Hear from me , it shall be for thy good .


I beseech your honour , one piece for me .

Avaunt ! thou damned door-keeper . Your house ,
But for this virgin that doth prop it , would 
Sink and overwhelm you . Away !


How's this ? We must take another course with you . If your peevish chastity , which is not worth a breakfast in the cheapest country under the cope , shall undo a whole household , let me be gelded like a spaniel . Come your ways .

Whither would you have me ?

I must have your maidenhead taken off , or the common hangman shall execute it . Come your ways . We'll have no more gentlemen driven away . Come your ways , I say .


How now ! what's the matter ?

Worse and worse , mistress ; she has here spoken holy words to the Lord Lysimachus .

O ! abominable .

She makes our profession as it were to stink afore the face of the gods .

Marry , hang her up for ever !

The nobleman would have dealt with her like a nobleman , and she sent him away as cold as a snowball ; saying his prayers too .

Boult , take her away ; use her at thy pleasure ; crack the glass of her virginity , and make the rest malleable .

An if she were a thornier piece of ground than she is , she shall be ploughed .

Hark , hark , you gods !

She conjures ; away with her ! Would she had never come within my doors ! Marry , hang you ! She's born to undo us . Will you not go the way of women-kind ? Marry , come up , my dish of chastity with rosemary and bays !


Come , mistress ; come your ways with me .

Whither wilt thou have me ?

To take from you the jewel you hold so dear .

Prithee , tell me one thing first .

Come now , your one thing .

What canst thou wish thine enemy to be ?

Why , I could wish him to be my master , or rather , my mistress .

Neither of these are so bad as thou art ,
Since they do better thee in their command .
Thou hold'st a place , for which the pained'st fiend 
Of hell would not in reputation change ;
Thou art the damned door-keeper to every 
Coystril that comes inquiring for his Tib ,
To the choleric fisting of every rogue 
Thy ear is liable , thy food is such 
As hath been belch'd on by infected lungs .

What would you have me do ? go to the wars , would you ? where a man may serve seven years for the loss of a leg , and have not money enough in the end to buy him a wooden one ?

Do any thing but this thou doest . Empty .
Old receptacles , or common sewers , of filth ;
Serve by indenture to the common hangman :
Any of these ways are yet better than this ;
For what thou professest , a baboon , could he speak ,
Would own a name too dear . O ! that the gods 
Would safely deliver me from this place .
Here , here's gold for thee .
If that thy master would gain by me ,
Proclaim that I can sing , weave , sew , and dance ,
With other virtues , which I'll keep from boast ;
And I will undertake all these to teach .
I doubt not but this populous city will 
Yield many scholars .

But can you teach all this you speak of ?

Prove that I cannot , take me home again ,
And prostitute me to the basest groom 
That doth frequent your house .

Well , I will see what I can do for thee ; if I can place thee , I will .

But , amongst honest women .

Faith , my acquaintance lies little amongst them . But since my master and mistress have bought you , there's no going but by their consent ; therefore I will make them acquainted with your purpose , and I doubt not but I shall find them tractable enough . Come ; I'll do for thee what I can ; come your ways .


Marina thus the brothel 'scapes , and chances 
Into an honest house , our story says .
She sings like one immortal , and she dances 
As goddess-like to her admired lays ;
Deep clerks she dumbs ; and with her neeld composes 
Nature's own shape , of bud , bird , branch , or berry ,
That even her art sisters the natural roses ;
Her inkle , silk , twin with the rubied cherry ;
That pupils lacks she none of noble race ,
Who pour their bounty on her ; and her gain 
She gives the cursed bawd . Here we her place ;
And to her father turn our thoughts again ,
Where we left him , on the sea . We there him lost ,
Whence , driven before the winds , he is arriv'd 
Here where his daughter dwells : and on this coast 
Suppose him now at anchor . The city striv'd 
God Neptune's annual feast to keep ; from whence 
Lysimachus our Tyrian ship espies ,
His banners sable , trimm'd with rich expense ;
And to him in his barge with fervour hies .
In your supposing once more put your sight 
Of heavy Pericles ; think this his bark :
Where what is done in action , more , if might ,
Shall be discover'd ; please you , sit and hark .

Where's the Lord Helicanus ? he can resolve you .
O ! here he is .
Sir , there's a barge put off from Mitylene ,
And in it is Lysimachus , the governor ,
Who craves to come aboard . What is your will ?

That he have his . Call up some gentlemen .

Ho , gentlemen ! my lord calls .


Doth your lordship call ?

Gentlemen , there's some of worth would come aboard ;
I pray ye , greet them fairly .

Sir ,
This is the man that can , in aught you would ,
Resolve you .

Hail , reverend sir ! The gods preserve you !

And you , sir , to outlive the age I am ,
And die as I would do .

You wish me well .
Being on shore , honouring of Neptune's triumphs ,
Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us ,
I made to it to know of whence you are .

First , what is your place ?

I am the governor of this place you lie before .

Sir ,
Our vessel is of Tyre , in it the king ;
A man who for this three months hath not spoken 
To any one , nor taken sustenance 
But to prorogue his grief .

Upon what ground is his distemperature ?

'Twould be too tedious to repeat ;
But the main grief springs from the loss 
Of a beloved daughter and a wife .

May we not see him ?

You may ;
But bootless is your sight : he will not speak 
To any .

Yet let me obtain my wish .

Behold him .

This was a goodly person ,
Till the disaster that , one mortal night ,
Drove him to this .

Sir king , all hail ! the gods preserve you !
Hall , royal sir !

It is in vain ; he will not speak to you .

Sir ,
We have a maid in Mitylene , I durst wager ,
Would win some words of him .

'Tis well bethought .
She questionless with her sweet harmony 
And other chosen attractions , would allure ,
And make a battery through his deafen'd ports 
Which now are midway stopp'd :
She is all happy as the fair'st of all ,
And with her fellow maids is now upon 
The leafy shelter that abuts against 
The island's side .


Sure , all's effectless ; yet nothing we'll omit ,
That bears recovery's name . But , since your kindness 
We have stretch'd thus far , let us beseech you ,
That for our gold we may provision have ,
Wherein we are not destitute for want ,
But weary for the staleness .

O ! sir , a courtesy ,
Which if we should deny , the most just gods 
For every graff would send a caterpillar ,
And so afflict our province . Yet once more 
Let me entreat to know at large the cause 
Of your king's sorrow .

Sit , sir , I will recount it to you ;
But see , I am prevented .


O ! here is 
The lady that I sent for . Welcome , fair one !
Is't not a goodly presence ?

She's a gallant lady .

She's such a one , that were I well assur'd 
Came of a gentle kind and noble stock ,
I'd wish no better choice , and think me rarely wed .
Fair one , all goodness that consists in bounty 
Expect even here , where is a kingly patient :
If that thy prosperous and artificial feat 
Can draw him but to answer thee in aught ,
Thy sacred physic shall receive such pay 
As thy desires can wish .

Sir , I will use 
My utmost skill in his recovery ,
Provided 
That none but I and my companion maid 
Be suffer'd to come near him .

Come , let us leave her ;
And the gods make her prosperous !


Mark'd he your music ?

No , nor look'd on us .

See , she will speak to him .

Hail , sir ! my lord , lend ear .

Hum ! ha !

I am a maid ,
My lord , that ne'er before invited eyes ,
But have been gaz'd on like a comet ; she speaks ,
My lord , that , may be , hath endur'd a grief 
Might equal yours , if both were justly weigh'd .
Though wayward Fortune did malign my state ,
My derivation was from ancestors 
Who stood equivalent with mighty kings ;
But time hath rooted out my parentage ,
And to the world and awkward casualties 
Bound me in servitude .

I will desist ;
But there is something glows upon my cheek ,
And whispers in mine ear , 'Go not till he speak .' 

My fortunes parentage good parentage 
To equal mine !was it not thus ? what say you ?

I said , my lord , if you did know my parentage ,
You would not do me violence .

I do think so . Pray you , turn your eyes upon me .
You are like something that What country-woman ?
Here of these shores ?

No , nor of any shores ;
Yet I was mortally brought forth , and am 
No other than I appear .

I am great with woe , and shall deliver weeping .
My dearest wife was like this maid , and such a one 
My daughter might have been : my queen's square brows ;
Her stature to an inch ; as wand-like straight ;
As silver-voic'd ; her eyes as jewel-like ,
And cas'd as richly ; in pace another Juno ;
Who starves the ears she feeds , and makes them hungry ,
The more she gives them speech . Where do you live ?

Where I am but a stranger ; from the deck 
You may discern the place .

Where were you bred ?
And how achiev'd you these endowments , which 
You make more rich to owe ?

Should I tell my history , it would seem 
Like lies , disdain'd in the reporting .

Prithee , speak ;
Falseness cannot come from thee , for thou look'st 
Modest as justice , and thou seem'st a palace 
For the crown'd truth to dwell in . I believe thee ,
And make my senses credit thy relation 
To points that seem impossible ; for thou lookest 
Like one I lov'd indeed . What were thy friends ?
Didst thou not say when I did push thee back ,
Which was when I perceiv'd thee ,that thou cam'st 
From good descending ?

So indeed I did .

Report thy parentage . I think thou saidst 
Thou hadst been toss'd from wrong to injury ,
And that thou thought'st thy griefs might equal mine ,
If both were open'd .

Some such thing 
I said , and said no more but what my thoughts 
Did warrant me was likely .

Tell thy story ;
If thine consider'd prove the thousandth part 
Of my endurance , thou art a man , and I 
Have suffer'd like a girl ; yet thou dost look 
Like Patience gazing on kings' graves , and smiling 
Extremity out of act . What were thy friends ?
How lost thou them ? Thy name , my most kind virgin ?
Recount , I do beseech thee . Come , sit by me .

My name is Marina .

O ! I am mock'd ,
And thou by some incensed god sent hither 
To make the world to laugh at me .

Patience , good sir ,
Or here I'll cease .

Nay , I'll be patient .
Thou little know'st how thou dost startle me ,
To call thyself Marina .

The name 
Was given me by one that had some power ;
My father , and a king .

How ! a king's daughter ?
And call'd Marina ?

You said you would believe me ;
But , not to be a troubler of your peace ,
I will end here .

But are you flesh and blood ?
Have you a working pulse ? and are no fairy ?
Motion !Well ; speak on . Where were you born ?
And wherefore call'd Marina ?

Call'd Marina 
For I was born at sea .

At sea ! what mother ?

My mother was the daughter of a king ;
Who died the minute I was born ,
As my good nurse Lychorida hath oft 
Deliver'd weeping .

O ! stop there a little .
This is the rarest dream that e'er dull sleep 
Did mock sad fools withal ; this cannot be .
My daughter's buried . Well ; where were you bred ?
I'll hear you more , to the bottom of your story ,
And never interrupt you .

You'll scorn to believe me ; 'twere best I did give o'er .

I will believe you by the syllable 
Of what you shall deliver . Yet , give me leave :
How came you in these parts ? where were you bred ?

The king my father did in Tarsus leave me ,
Till cruel Cleon , with his wicked wife ,
Did seek to murder me ; and having woo'd 
A villain to attempt it , who having drawn to do 't ,
A crew of pirates came and rescu'd me ;
Brought me to Mitylene . But , good sir ,
Whither will you have me ? Why do you weep ? It may be 
You think me an impostor ; no , good faith ;
I am the daughter to King Pericles ,
If good King Pericles be .

Ho , Helicanus !

Calls my lord ?

Thou art a grave and noble counsellor ,
Most wise in general ; tell me , if thou canst ,
What this maid is , or what is like to be ,
That thus hath made me weep ?

I know not ; but 
Here is the regent , sir , of Mitylene ,
Speaks nobly of her .

She never would tell 
Her parentage ; being demanded that ,
She would sit still and weep .

O Helicanus ! strike me , honour'd sir ;
Give me a gash , put me to present pain ,
Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me 
O'erbear the shores of my mortality ,
And drown me with their sweetness . O ! come hither ,
Thou that begett'st him that did thee beget ;
Thou that wast born at sea , buried at Tarsus ,
And found at sea again . O Helicanus !
Down on thy knees , thank the holy gods as loud 
As thunder threatens us ; this is Marina .
What was thy mother's name ? tell me but that ,
For truth can never be confirm'd enough ,
Though doubts did ever sleep .

First , sir , I pray ,
What is your title ?

I am Pericles of Tyre : but tell me now 
My drown'd queen's name , as in the rest you said 
Thou hast been god-like perfect ;
Thou'rt heir of kingdoms , and another life 
To Pericles thy father .

Is it no more to be your daughter than 
To say my mother's name was Thaisa ?
Thaisa was my mother , who did end 
The minute I began .

Now , blessing on thee ! rise ; thou art my child ,
Give me fresh garments . Mine own , Helicanus ;
She is not dead at Tarsus , as she should have been ,
By savage Cleon ; she shall tell thee all ;
When thou shalt kneel , and justify in knowledge 
She is thy very princess . Who is this ?

Sir , 'tis the governor of Mitylene ,
Who , hearing of your melancholy state ,
Did come to see you .

I embrace you .
Give me my robes . I am wild in my beholding .
O heavens ! bless my girl . But , hark ! what music ?
Tell Helicanus , my Marina , tell him 
O'er , point by point , for yet he seems to doubt ,
How sure you are my daughter . But , what music ?

My lord , I hear none .

None !
The music of the spheres ! List , my Marina .

It is not good to cross him ; give him way .

Rarest sounds ! Do ye not hear ?

My lord , I hear .


Most heavenly music :
It nips me unto list'ning , and thick slumber 
Hangs upon mine eyes ; let me rest .


A pillow for his head .
So , leave him all . Well , my companion friends ,
If this but answer to my just belief ,
I'll well remember you .

My temple stands in Ephesus ; hie thee thither ,
And do upon mine altar sacrifice .
There , when my maiden priests are met together ,
Before the people all ,
Reveal how thou at sea didst lose thy wife ;
To mourn thy crosses , with thy daughter's , call 
And give them repetition to the life .
Perform my bidding , or thou liv'st in woe ;
Do it , and happy ; by my silver bow !
Awake , and tell thy dream !


Celestial Dian , goddess argentine ,
I will obey thee ! Helicanus !


Sir ?

My purpose was for Tarsus , there to strike 
The inhospitable Cleon : but I am 
For other service first : toward Ephesus 
Turn our blown sails ; eftsoons I'll tell thee why .


Shall we refresh us , sir , upon your shore ,
And give you gold for such provision 
As our intents will need ?

Sir ,
With all my heart ; and when you come ashore ,
I have another suit .

You shall prevail ,
Were it to woo my daughter ; for it seems 
You have been noble towards her .

Sir , lend me your arm .

Come , my Marina .


Now our sands are almost run ;
More a little , and then dumb .
This , my last boon , give me ,
For such kindness must relieve me ,
That you aptly will suppose 
What pageantry , what feats , what shows ,
What minstrelsy , and pretty din ,
The regent made in Mitylen 
To greet the king . So he thriv'd ,
That he is promis'd to be wiv'd 
To fair Marina ; but in no wise 
Till he had done his sacrifice ,
As Dian bade : whereto being bound ,
The interim , pray you , all confound .
In feather'd briefness sails are fill'd ,
And wishes fall out as they're will'd .
At Ephesus , the temple see ,
Our king and all his company .
That he can hither come so soon ,
Is by your fancy's thankful doom .

Hail , Dian ! to perform thy just command ,
I here confess myself the King of Tyre ;
Who , frighted from my country , did wed 
At Pentapolis the fair Thaisa .
At sea in childbed died she , but brought forth 
A maid-child call'd Marina ; who , O goddess !
Wears yet thy silver livery . She at Tarsus 
Was nurs'd with Cleon , whom at fourteen years 
He sought to murder ; but her better stars 
Brought her to Mitylene , 'gainst whose shore 
Riding , her fortunes brought the maid aboard us ,
Where , by her own most clear remembrance , she 
Made known herself my daughter .

Voice and favour !
You are , you are O royal Pericles !


What means the nun ? she dies ! help , gentlemen !

Noble sir ,
If you have told Diana's altar true ,
This is your wife .

Reverend appearer , no ;
I threw her o'erboard with these very arms .

Upon this coast , I warrant you .

'Tis most certain .

Look to the lady . O ! she's but o'erjoy'd .
Early in blustering morn this lady was 
Thrown upon this shore . I op'd the coffin ,
Found there rich jewels ; recover'd her , and plac'd her 
Here in Diana's temple .

May we see them ?

Great sir , they shall be brought you to my house ,
Whither I invite you . Look ! Thaisa is 
Recovered .

O ! let me look !
If he be none of mine , my sanctity 
Will to my sense bend no licentious ear ,
But curb it , spite of seeing . O ! my lord ,
Are you not Pericles ? Like him you speak ,
Like him you are . Did you not name a tempest ,
A birth , and death ?

The voice of dead Thaisa !

That Thaisa am I , supposed dead 
And drown'd .

Immortal Dian !

Now I know you better .
When we with tears parted Pentapolis ,
The king my father gave you such a ring .


This , this : no more , you gods ! your present kindness 
Makes my past miseries sport : you shall do well ,
That on the touching of her lips I may 
Melt and no more be seen . O ! come , be buried 
A second time within these arms .

My heart 
Leaps to be gone into my mother's bosom .


Look , who kneels here ! Flesh of thy flesh , Thaisa ;
Thy burden at the sea , and call'd Marina ,
For she was yielded there .

Bless'd , and mine own !

Hail , madam , and my queen !

I know you not .

You have heard me say , when I did fly from Tyre ,
I left behind an ancient substitute ;
Can you remember what I call'd the man ?
I have nam'd him oft .

'Twas Helicanus then .

Still confirmation !
Embrace him , dear Thaisa ; this is he .
Now do I long to hear how you were found ,
How possibly preserv'd , and whom to thank ,
Besides the gods , for this great miracle .

Lord Cerimon , my lord ; this man ,
Through whom the gods have shown their power ; that can 
From first to last resolve you .

Reverend sir ,
The gods can have no mortal officer 
More like a god than you . Will you deliver 
How this dead queen re-lives ?

I will , my lord .
Beseech you , first go with me to my house .
Where shall be shown you all was found with her ;
How she came placed here in the temple ;
No needful thing omitted .

Pure Dian ! bless thee for thy vision ; I 
Will offer night-oblations to thee . Thaisa ,
This prince , the fair-betrothed of your daughter ,
Shall marry her at Pentapolis . And now 
This ornament 
Makes me look dismal will I clip to form ;
And what this fourteen years no rasor touch'd ,
To grace thy marriage-day I'll beautify .

Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit , sir ,
My father's dead .

Heavens make a star of him ! Yet there , my queen ,
We'll celebrate their nuptials , and ourselves 
Will in that kingdom spend our following days ;
Our son and daughter shall in Tyrus reign .
Lord Cerimon , we do our longing stay 
To hear the rest untold . Sir , lead's the way .

In Antiochus and his daughter you have heard 
Of monstrous lust the due and just reward :
In Pericles , his queen , and daughter , seen 
Although assail'd with fortune fierce and keen 
Virtue preserv'd from fell destruction's blast ,
Led on by heaven , and crown'd with joy at last .
In Helicanus may you well descry 
A figure of truth , of faith , of loyalty .
In reverend Cerimon there well appears 
The worth that learned charity aye wears .
For wicked Cleon and his wife , when fame 
Had spread their cursed deed , and honour'd name 
Of Pericles , to rage the city turn ,
That him and his they in his palace burn :
The gods for murder seemed so content 
To punish them ; although not done , but meant .
So on your patience evermore attending ,
New joy wait on you ! Here our play hath ending .

THE COMEDY OF ERRORS

Proceed , Solinus , to procure my fall ,
And by the doom of death end woes and all .

Merchant of Syracusa , plead no more .
I am not partial to infringe our laws :
The enmity and discord which of late 
Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke 
To merchants , our well-dealing countrymen ,
Who , wanting guilders to redeem their lives ,
Have seal'd his rigorous statutes with their bloods ,
Excludes all pity from our threat'ning looks .
For , since the mortal and intestine jars 
'Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us ,
It hath in solemn synods been decreed ,
Both by the Syracusians and ourselves ,
T' admit no traffic to our adverse towns :
Nay , more , if any , born at Ephesus 
Be seen at Syracusian marts and fairs ;
Again , if any Syracusian born 
Come to the bay of Ephesus , he dies ,
His goods confiscate to the duke's dispose ;
Unless a thousand marks be levied ,
To quit the penalty and to ransom him .
Thy substance , valu'd at the highest rate ,
Cannot amount unto a hundred marks ;
Therefore , by law thou art condemn'd to die .

Yet this my comfort : when your words are done ,
My woes end likewise with the evening sun .

Well , Syracusian ; say , in brief the cause 
Why thou departedst from thy native home ,
And for what cause thou cam'st to Ephesus .

A heavier task could not have been impos'd 
Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable ;
Yet , that the world may witness that my end 
Was wrought by nature , not by vile offence ,
I'll utter what my sorrow gives me leave .
In Syracusa was I born , and wed 
Unto a woman , happy but for me ,
And by me too , had not our hap been bad .
With her I liv'd in joy : our wealth increas'd 
By prosperous voyages I often made 
To Epidamnum ; till my factor's death ,
And the great care of goods at random left ,
Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse :
From whom my absence was not six months old ,
Before herself ,almost at fainting under 
The pleasing punishment that women bear ,
Had made provision for her following me ,
And soon and safe arrived where I was .
There had she not been long but she became 
A joyful mother of two goodly sons ;
And , which was strange , the one so like the other ,
As could not be distinguish'd but by names .
That very hour , and in the self-same inn ,
A meaner woman was delivered 
Of such a burden , male twins , both alike .
Those ,for their parents were exceeding poor ,
I bought , and brought up to attend my sons .
My wife , not meanly proud of two such boys ,
Made daily motions for our home return :
Unwilling I agreed ; alas ! too soon 
We came aboard .
A league from Epidamnum had we sail'd ,
Before the always-wind-obeying deep 
Gave any tragic instance of our harm :
But longer did we not retain much hope ;
For what obscured light the heavens did grant 
Did but convey unto our fearful minds 
A doubtful warrant of immediate death ;
Which , though myself would gladly have embrac'd ,
Yet the incessant weepings of my wife ,
Weeping before for what she saw must come ,
And piteous plainings of the pretty babes ,
That mourn'd for fashion , ignorant what to fear ,
Forc'd me to seek delays for them and me .
And this it was , for other means was none :
The sailors sought for safety by our boat ,
And left the ship , then sinking-ripe , to us :
My wife , more careful for the latter-born ,
Had fasten'd him unto a small spare mast ,
Such as seafaring men provide for storms ;
To him one of the other twins was bound ,
Whilst I had been like heedful of the other .
The children thus dispos'd , my wife and I ,
Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fix'd ,
Fasten'd ourselves at either end the mast ;
And floating straight , obedient to the stream ,
Were carried towards Corinth , as we thought .
At length the sun , gazing upon the earth ,
Dispers'd those vapours that offended us ,
And , by the benefit of his wished light 
The seas wax'd calm , and we discovered 
Two ships from far making amain to us ;
Of Corinth that , of Epidaurus this :
But ere they came ,O ! let me say no more ;
Gather the sequel by that went before .

Nay , forward , old man ; do not break off so ;
For we may pity , though not pardon thee .

O ! had the gods done so , I had not now 
Worthily term'd them merciless to us !
For , ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues ,
We were encounter'd by a mighty rock ;
Which being violently borne upon ,
Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst ;
So that , in this unjust divorce of us 
Fortune had left to both of us alike 
What to delight in , what to sorrow for .
Her part , poor soul ! seeming as burdened 
With lesser weight , but not with lesser woe ,
Was carried with more speed before the wind ,
And in our sight they three were taken up 
By fishermen of Corinth , as we thought .
At length , another ship had seiz'd on us ;
And , knowing whom it was their hap to save ,
Gave healthful welcome to their ship-wrack'd guests ;
And would have reft the fishers of their prey ,
Had not their bark been very slow of sail ;
And therefore homeward did they bend their course .
Thus have you heard me sever'd from my bliss ,
That by misfortune was my life prolong'd ,
To tell sad stories of my own mishaps .

And , for the sake of them thou sorrowest for ,
Do me the favour to dilate at full 
What hath befall'n of them and thee till now .

My youngest boy , and yet my eldest care ,
At eighteen years became inquisitive 
After his brother ; and importun'd me 
That his attendant for his case was like ,
Reft of his brother , but retain'd his name 
Might bear him company in the quest of him ;
Whom whilst I labour'd of a love to see ,
I hazarded the loss of whom I lov'd .
Five summers have I spent in furthest Greece ,
Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia ,
And , coasting homeward , came to Ephesus ,
Hopeless to find , yet loath to leave unsought 
Or that or any place that harbours men .
But here must end the story of my life ;
And happy were I in my timely death ,
Could all my travels warrant me they live .

Hapless  geon , whom the fates have mark'd 
To bear the extremity of dire mishap !
Now , trust me , were it not against our laws ,
Against my crown , my oath , my dignity ,
Which princes , would they , may not disannul ,
My soul should sue as advocate for thee .
But though thou art adjudged to the death 
And passed sentence may not be recall'd 
But to our honour's great disparagement ,
Yet will I favour thee in what I can :
Therefore , merchant , I'll limit thee this day 
To seek thy life by beneficial help .
Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus ;
Beg thou , or borrow , to make up the sum ,
And live ; if no , then thou art doom'd to die .
Gaoler , take him to thy custody .

I will , my lord .

Hopeless and helpless doth  geon wend ,
But to procrastinate his lifeless end .


Therefore , give out you are of Epidamnum ,
Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate .
This very day , a Syracusian merchant 
Is apprehended for arrival here ;
And , not being able to buy out his life ,
According to the statute of the town 
Dies ere the weary sun set in the west .
There is your money that I had to keep .

Go bear it to the Centaur , where we host ,
And stay there , Dromio , till I come to thee .
Within this hour it will be dinner-time :
Till that , I'll view the manners of the town ,
Peruse the traders , gaze upon the buildings ,
And then return and sleep within mine inn ,
For with long travel I am stiff and weary .
Get thee away .

Many a man would take you at your word ,
And go indeed , having so good a mean .


A trusty villain , sir , that very oft ,
When I am dull with care and melancholy ,
Lightens my humour with his merry jests .
What , will you walk with me about the town ,
And then go to my inn and dine with me ?

I am invited , sir , to certain merchants ,
Of whom I hope to make much benefit ;
I crave your pardon . Soon at five o'clock ,
Please you , I'll meet with you upon the mart ,
And afterward consort you till bed-time :
My present business calls me from you now .

Farewell till then : I will go lose myself ,
And wander up and down to view the city .

Sir , I commend you to your own content .


He that commends me to mine own content ,
Commends me to the thing I cannot get .
I to the world am like a drop of water 
That in the ocean seeks another drop ;
Who , falling there to find his fellow forth ,
Unseen , inquisitive , confounds himself :
So I , to find a mother and a brother ,
In quest of them , unhappy , lose myself .


Here comes the almanack of my true date .

What now ? How chance thou art return'd so soon ?

Return'd so soon ! rather approach'd too late :
The capon burns , the pig falls from the spit ,
The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell ;
My mistress made it one upon my cheek :
She is so hot because the meat is cold ;
The meat is cold because you come not home ;
You come not home because you have no stomach ;
You have no stomach , having broke your fast ;
But we , that know what 'tis to fast and pray ,
Are penitent for your default to-day .

Stop in your wind , sir : tell me this , I pray :
Where have you left the money that I gave you ?

O !sixpence , that I had o' Wednesday last 
To pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper ;
The saddler had it , sir ; I kept it not .

I am not in a sportive humour now .
Tell me , and dally not , where is the money ?
We being strangers here , how dar'st thou trust 
So great a charge from thine own custody ?

I pray you , jest , sir , as you sit at dinner .
I from my mistress come to you in post ;
If I return , I shall be post indeed ,
For she will score your fault upon my pate .
Methinks your maw , like mine , should be your clock 
And strike you home without a messenger .

Come , Dromio , come ; these jests are out of season ;
Reserve them till a merrier hour than this .
Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee ?

To me , sir ? why , you gave no gold to me .

Come on , sir knave , have done your foolishness ,
And tell me how thou hast dispos'd thy charge .

My charge was but to fetch you from the mart 
Home to your house , the Ph nix , sir , to dinner :
My mistress and her sister stays for you .

Now , as I am a Christian , answer me ,
In what safe place you have bestow'd my money ;
Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours 
That stands on tricks when I am undispos'd .
Where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me ?

I have some marks of yours upon my pate ,
Some of my mistress' marks upon my shoulders ,
But not a thousand marks between you both .
If I should pay your worship those again ,
Perchance you will not bear them patiently .

Thy mistress' marks ! what mistress , slave , hast thou ?

Your worship's wife , my mistress at the Ph nix ;
She that doth fast till you come home to dinner ,
And prays that you will hie you home to dinner .

What ! wilt thou flout me thus unto my face ,
Being forbid ? There , take you that , sir knave .


What mean you , sir ? for God's sake , hold your hands !
Nay , an you will not , sir , I'll take my heels .


Upon my life , by some device or other 
The villain is o'er-raught of all my money .
They say this town is full of cozenage ;
As , nimble jugglers that deceive the eye ,
Dark-working sorcerers that change the mind ,
Soul-killing witches that deform the body ,
Disguised cheaters , prating mountebanks ,
And many such-like liberties of sin :
If it prove so , I will be gone the sooner .
I'll to the Centaur , to go seek this slave :
I greatly fear my money is not safe .

Neither my husband , nor the slave return'd ,
That in such haste I sent to seek his master !
Sure , Luciana , it is two o'clock .

Perhaps some merchant hath invited him ,
And from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner .
Good sister , let us dine and never fret :
A man is master of his liberty :
Time is their master , and , when they see time ,
They'll go or come : if so , be patient , sister .

Why should their liberty than ours be more ?

Because their business still lies out o' door .

Look , when I serve him so , he takes it ill .

O ! know he is the bridle of your will .

There's none but asses will be bridled so .

Why , headstrong liberty is lash'd with woe .
There's nothing situate under heaven's eye 
But hath his bound , in earth , in sea , in sky :
The beasts , the fishes , and the winged fowls ,
Are their males' subjects and at their controls .
Men , more divine , the masters of all these ,
Lords of the wide world , and wild wat'ry seas ,
Indu'd with intellectual sense and souls ,
Of more pre-eminence than fish and fowls ,
Are masters to their females and their lords :
Then , let your will attend on their accords .

This servitude makes you to keep unwed .

Not this , but troubles of the marriage-bed .

But , were you wedded , you would bear some sway .

Ere I learn love , I'll practise to obey .

How if your husband start some other where ?

Till he come home again , I would forbear .

Patience unmov'd ! no marvel though she pause ;
They can be meek that have no other cause .
A wretched soul , bruis'd with adversity ,
We bid be quiet when we hear it cry ;
But were we burden'd with like weight of pain ,
As much , or more we should ourselves complain :
So thou , that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee ,
With urging helpless patience wouldst relieve me :
But if thou live to see like right bereft .
This fool-begg'd patience in thee will be left .

Well , I will marry one day , but to try .
Here comes your man : now is your husband nigh .


Say , is your tardy master now at hand ?

Nay , he's at two hands with me , and that my two ears can witness .

Say , didst thou speak with him ? Know'st thou his mind ?

Ay , ay , he told his mind upon mine ear .
Beshrew his hand , I scarce could understand it .

Spake he so doubtfully , thou couldst not feel his meaning ?

Nay , he struck so plainly , I could too well feel his blows ; and withal so doubtfully , that I could scarce understand them .

But say , I prithee , is he coming home ?
It seems he hath great care to please his wife .

Why , mistress , sure my master is horn-mad .

Horn-mad , thou villain !

I mean not cuckold-mad ; but , sure , he is stark mad .
When I desir'd him to come home to dinner ,
He ask'd me for a thousand marks in gold :
''Tis dinner time ,' quoth I ; 'my gold !' quoth he :
'Your meat doth burn ,' quoth I ; 'my gold !' quoth he :
'Will you come home ?' quoth I : 'my gold !' quoth he :
'Where is the thousand marks I gave thee , villain ?' 
'The pig ,' quoth I , 'is burn'd ;' 'my gold !' quoth he :
'My mistress , sir ,' quoth I : 'hang up thy mistress !
I know not thy mistress : out on thy mistress !' 

Quoth who ?

Quoth my master :
'I know ,' quoth he , 'no house , no wife , no mistress .' 
So that my errand , due unto my tongue ,
I thank him , I bear home upon my shoulders ;
For , in conclusion , he did beat me there .

Go back again , thou slave , and fetch him home .

Go back again , and be new beaten home ?
For God's sake , send some other messenger .

Back , slave , or I will break thy pate across .

And he will bless that cross with other beating :
Between you , I shall have a holy head .

Hence , prating peasant ! fetch thy master home .

Am I so round with you as you with me ,
That like a football you do spurn me thus ?
You spurn me hence , and he will spurn me hither :
If I last in this service , you must case me in leather .


Fie , how impatience loureth in your face !

His company must do his minions grace ,
Whilst I at home starve for a merry look .
Hath homely age the alluring beauty took 
From my poor cheek ? then , he hath wasted it :
Are my discourses dull ? barren my wit ?
If voluble and sharp discourse be marr'd ,
Unkindness blunts it more than marble hard :
Do their gay vestments his affections bait ?
That's not my fault ; he's master of my state :
What ruins are in me that can be found 
By him not ruin'd ? then is he the ground 
Of my defeatures . My decayed fair 
A sunny look of his would soon repair ;
But , too unruly deer , he breaks the pale 
And feeds from home : poor I am but his stale .

Self-harming jealousy ! fie ! beat it hence .

Unfeeling fools can with such wrengs dispense .
I know his eye doth homage otherwhere ,
Or else what lets it but he would be here ?
Sister , you know he promis'd me a chain :
Would that alone , alone he would detain ,
So he would keep fair quarter with his bed !
I see , the jewel best enamelled 
Will lose his beauty ; and though gold bides still 
That others touch , yet often touching will 
Wear gold ; and no man that hath a name ,
By falsehood and corruption doth it shame .
Since that my beauty cannot please his eye ,
I'll weep what's left away , and weeping die .

How many fond fools serve mad jealousy !


The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up 
Safe at the Centaur ; and the heedful slave 
Is wander'd forth , in care to seek me out .
By computation , and mine host's report ,
I could not speak with Dromio since at first 
I sent him from the mart . See , here he comes .


How now , sir ! is your merry humour alter'd ?
As you love strokes , so jest with me again .
You know no Centaur ? You receiv'd no gold ?
Your mistress sent to have me home to dinner ?
My house was at the Ph nix ? Wast thou mad ,

That thus so madly thou didst answer me ?

What answer , sir ? when spake I such a word ?

Even now , even here , not half-an-hour since .

I did not see you since you sent me hence ,
Home to the Centaur , with the gold you gave me .

Villain , thou didst deny the gold's receipt ,
And told'st me of a mistress and a dinner ;
For which , I hope , thou felt'st I was displeas'd .

I am glad to see you in this merry vein :
What means this jest ? I pray you , master , tell me .

Yea , dost thou jeer , and flout me in the teeth ?
Think'st thou I jest ? Hold , take thou that , and that .


Hold , sir , for God's sake ! now your jest is earnest .
Upon what bargain do you give it me ?

Because that I familiarly sometimes 
Do use you for my fool , and chat with you ,
Your sauciness will jest upon my love ,
And make a common of my serious hours .
When the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport ,
But creep in crannies when he hides his beams .
If you will jest with me , know my aspect ,
And fashion your demeanour to my looks ,
Or I will beat this method in your sconce .

Sconce , call you it ? so you would leave battering , I had rather have it a head : an you use these blows long , I must get a sconce for my head and insconce it too ; or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders . But , I pray , sir , why am I beaten ?

Dost thou not know ?

Nothing , sir , but that I am beaten .

Shall I tell you why ?

Ay , sir , and wherefore ; for they say every why hath a wherefore .

Why , first ,for flouting me ; and then , wherefore ,
For urging it the second time to me .

Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season ,
When , in the why and the wherefore is neither rime nor reason ?
Well , sir , I thank you .

Thank me , sir ! for what ?

Marry , sir , for this something that you gave me for nothing .

I'll make you amends next , to give you nothing for something . But say , sir , is it dinner-time ?

No , sir : I think the meat wants that I have 

In good time , sir ; what's that ?

Basting .

Well , sir , then 'twill be dry .

If it be , sir , I pray you eat none of it .

Your reason ?

Lest it make you choleric , and purchase me another dry basting .

Well , sir , learn to jest in good time : there's a time for all things .

I durst have denied that , before you were so choleric .

By what rule , sir ?

Marry , sir , by a rule as plain as the plain bald pate of Father Time himself .

Let's hear it .

There's no time for a man to recover his hair that grows bald by nature .

May he not do it by fine and recovery ?

Yes , to pay a fine for a periwig and recover the lost hair of another man .

Why is Time such a niggard of hair , being , as it is , so plentiful an excrement ?

Because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts : and what he hath scanted men in hair , he hath given them in wit .

Why , but there's many a man hath more hair than wit .

Not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair .

Why , thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit .

The plainer dealer , the sooner lost : yet be loseth it in a kind of jollity .

For what reason ?

For two ; and sound ones too .

Nay , not sound , I pray you .

Sure ones then .

Nay , not sure , in a thing falsing .

Certain ones , then .

Name them .

The one , to save the money that he spends in tiring ; the other , that at dinner they should not drop in his porridge .

You would all this time have proved there is no time for all things .

Marry , and did , sir ; namely , no time to recover hair lost by nature .

But your reason was not substantial , why there is not time to recover .

Thus I mend it : Time himself is bald , and therefore to the world's end will have bald followers .

I knew 'twould be a bald conclusion .
But soft ! who wafts us yonder ?


Ay , ay , Antipholus , look strange , and frown :
Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects ,
I am not Adriana , nor thy wife .
The time was once when thou unurg'd wouldst vow 
That never words were music to thine ear ,
That never object pleasing in thine eye ,
That never touch well welcome to thy hand ,
That never meat sweet-savour'd in thy taste ,
Unless I spake , or look'd , or touch'd , or carv'd to thee .
How comes it now , my husband , O ! how comes it ,
That thou art thus estranged from thyself ?
Thyself I call it , being strange to me ,
That , undividable , incorporate ,
Am better than thy dear self's better part .
Ah ! do not tear away thyself from me ,
For know , my love , as easy mayst thou fall 
A drop of water in the breaking gulf ,
And take unmingled thence that drop again ,
Without addition or diminishing ,
As take from me thyself and not me too .
How dearly would it touch thee to the quick ,
Shouldst thou but hear I were licentious ,
And that this body , consecrate to thee ,
By ruffian lust should be contaminate !
Wouldst thou not spit at me and spurn at me ,
And hurl the name of husband in my face ,
And tear the stain'd skin off my harlot-brow ,
And from my false hand cut the wedding-ring 
And break it with a deep-divorcing vow ?
I know thou canst ; and therefore , see thou do it .
I am possess'd with an adulterate blot ;
My blood is mingled with the crime of lust :
For if we two be one and thou play false ,
I do digest the poison of thy flesh ,
Being strumpeted by thy contagion .
Keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed ;
I live unstain'd , thou undishonoured .

Plead you to me , fair dame ? I know you not :
In Ephesus I am but two hours old ,
As strange unto your town as to your talk ;
Who , every word by all my wit being scann'd ,
Want wit in all one word to understand .

Fie , brother : how the world is chang'd with you !
When were you wont to use my sister thus ?
She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner .

By Dromio ?

By me ?

By thee ; and this thou didst return from him ,
That he did buffet thee , and in his blows ,
Denied my house for his , me for his wife .

Did you converse , sir , with this gentle-woman ?
What is the course and drift of your compact ?

I , sir ? I never saw her till this time .

Villain , thou liest ; for even her very words 
Didst thou deliver to me on the mart .

I never spake with her in all my life .

How can she thus then , call us by our names ,
Unless it be by inspiration ?

How ill agrees it with your gravity 
To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave ,
A betting him to thwart me in my mood !
Be it my wrong you are from me exempt ,
But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt .
Come , I will fasten on this sleeve of thine ;
Thou art an elm , my husband , I a vine ,
Whose weakness , married to thy stronger state ,
Makes me with thy strength to communicate :
If aught possess thee from me , it is dross ,
Usurping ivy , brier , or idle moss ;
Who , all for want of pruning , with intrusion 
Infect thy sap and live on thy confusion .

To me she speaks ; she moves me for her theme !
What ! was I married to her in my dream ?
Or sleep I now and think I hear all this ?
What error drives our eyes and ears amiss ?
Until I know this sure uncertainty ,
I'll entertain the offer'd fallacy .

Dromio , go bid the servants spread for dinner 

O , for my beads ! I cross me for a sinner .
This is the fairy land : O ! spite of spites .
We talk with goblins , owls , and elvish sprites :
If we obey them not , this will ensue ,
They'll suck our breath , or pinch us black and blue .

Why prat'st thou to thyself and answer'st not ?
Dromio , thou drone , thou snail , thou slug , thou sot !

I am transformed , master , am not I ?

I think thou art , in mind , and so am I .

Nay , master , both in mind and in my shape .

Thou hast thine own form .

No , I am an ape .

If thou art chang'd to aught , 'tis to an ass .

'Tis true ; she rides me and I long for grass .
'Tis so , I am an ass ; else it could never be 
But I should know her as well as she knows me .

Come , come ; no longer will I be a fool ,
To put the finger in the eye and weep ,
Whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn .
Come , sir , to dinner . Dromio , keep the gate .
Husband , I'll dine above with you to-day ,
And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks .
Sirrah , if any ask you for your master ,
Say he dines forth , and let no creature enter .
Come , sister . Dromio , play the porter well .

Am I in earth , in heaven , or in hell ?
Sleeping or waking ? mad or well-advis'd ?
Known unto these , and to myself disguis'd !
I'll say as they say , and persever so ,
And in this mist at all adventures go .

Master , shall I be porter at the gate ?

Ay ; and let none enter , lest I break your pate .

Come , come , Antipholus ; we dine too late .

Good Signior Angelo , you must excuse us all ;
My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours ;
Say that I linger'd with you at your shop 
To see the making of her carkanet ,
And that to-morrow you will bring it home .
But here's a villain , that would face me down 
He met me on the mart , and that I beat him ,
And charg'd him with a thousand marks in gold ,
And that I did deny my wife and house .
Thou drunkard , thou , what didst thou mean by this ?

Say what you will , sir , but I know what I know ;
That you beat me at the mart , I have your hand to show :
If the skin were parchment and the blows you gave were ink ,
Your own handwriting would tell you what I think .

I think thou art an ass .

Marry , so it doth appear 
By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear .
I should kick , being kick'd ; and , being at that pass ,
You would keep from my heels and beware of an ass .

You are sad , Signior Balthazar : pray God , our cheer 
May answer my good will and your good welcome here .

I hold your dainties cheap , sir , and your welcome dear .

O , Signior Balthazar , either at flesh or fish ,
A table-full of welcome makes scarce one dainty dish .

Good meat , sir , is common ; that every churl affords .

And welcome more common , for that's nothing but words .

Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast .

Ay , to a niggardly host and more sparing guest :
But though my cates be mean , take them in good part ;
Better cheer may you have , but not with better heart .
But soft ! my door is lock'd . Go bid them let us in .

Maud , Bridget , Marian , Cicely , Gillian , Ginn !

Mome , malt-horse , capon , coxcomb , idiot , patch !
Either get thee from the door or sit down at the hatch .
Dost thou conjure for wenches , that thou call'st for such store ,
When one is one too many ? Go , get thee from the door .

What patch is made our porter ?My master stays in the street .

Let him walk from whence he came , lest he catch cold on's feet .

Who talks within there ? ho ! open the door .

Right , sir ; I'll tell you when , an you'll tell me wherefore .

Wherefore ? for my dinner : I have not din'd to-day .

Nor to-day here you must not ; come again when you may .

What art thou that keep'st me out from the house I owe ?

The porter for this time , sir , and my name is Dromio .

O villain ! thou hast stolen both mine office and my name :
The one ne'er got me credit , the other mickle blame .
If thou hadst been Dromio to-day in my place ,
Thou wouldst have chang'd thy face for a name , or thy name for an ass .

What a coil is there , Dromio ! who are those at the gate ?

Let my master in , Luce .

Faith , no ; he comes too late ;
And so tell your master .

O Lord ! I must laugh .
Have at you with a proverb : Shall I set in my staff ?

Have at you with another : that's when ? can you tell ?

If thy name be call'd Luce ,Luce , thou hast answer'd him well .

Do you hear , you minion ? you'll let us in , I trow ?

I thought to have ask'd you .

And you said , no .

So come , help : well struck ! there was blow for blow .

Thou baggage , let me in .

Can you tell for whose sake ?

Master , knock the door hard .

Let him knock till it ache .

You'll cry for this , minion , if I beat the door down .

What needs all that , and a pair of stocks in the town ?

Who is that at the door that keeps all this noise ?

By my troth your town is troubled with unruly boys .

Are you there , wife ? you might have come before .

Your wife , sir knave ! go , get you from the door .

If you went in pain , master , this 'knave' would go sore .

Here is neither cheer , sir , nor welcome : we would fain have either .

In debating which was best , we shall part with neither .

They stand at the door , master : bid them welcome hither .

There is something in the wind , that we cannot get in .

You would say so , master , if your garments were thin .
Your cake here is warm within ; you stand here in the cold :
It would make a man mad as a buck to be so bought and sold .

Go fetch me something : I'll break ope the gate .

Break any breaking here , and I'll break your knave's pate .

A man may break a word with you , sir , and words are but wind :
Ay , and break it in your face , so he break it not behind .

It seems thou wantest breaking : out upon thee , hind !

Here's too much 'out upon thee !' I pray thee , let me in .

Ay , when fowls have no feathers , and fish have no fin .

Well , I'll break in . Go borrow me a crow .

A crow without feather ? Master , mean you so ?
For a fish without a fin , there's a fowl without a feather :
If a crow help us in , sirrah , we'll pluck a crow together .

Go get thee gone : fetch me an iron crow .

Have patience , sir ; O ! let it not be so ;
Herein you war against your reputation ,
And draw within the compass of suspect 
The unviolated honour of your wife .
Once this ,your long experience of her wisdom ,
Her sober virtue , years , and modesty ,
Plead on her part some cause to you unknown ;
And doubt not , sir , but she will well excuse 
Why at this time the doors are made against you .
Be rul'd by me : depart in patience ,
And let us to the Tiger all to dinner ;
And about evening come yourself alone ,
To know the reason of this strange restraint .
If by strong hand you offer to break in 
Now in the stirring passage of the day ,
A vulgar comment will be made of it ,
And that supposed by the common rout 
Against your yet ungalled estimation ,
That may with foul intrusion enter in 
And dwell upon your grave when you are dead ;
For slander lives upon succession ,
For ever housed where it gets possession .

You have prevail'd : I will depart in quiet ,
And , in despite of mirth , mean to be merry .
I know a wench of excellent discourse ,
Pretty and witty , wild and yet , too , gentle :
There will we dine : this woman that I mean ,
My wife ,but , I protest , without desert ,
Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal :
To her will we to dinner .

Get you home ,
And fetch the chain ; by this I know 'tis made :
Bring it , I pray you , to the Porpentine ;
For there's the house : that chain will I bestow ,
Be it for nothing but to spite my wife ,
Upon mine hostess there . Good sir , make haste .
Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me ,
I'll knock elsewhere , to see if they'll disdain me .

I'll meet you at that place some hour hence .

Do so . This jest shall cost me some expense .


And may it be that you have quite forgot A husband's office ? Shall , Antipholus ,
Even in the spring of love , thy love-springs rot ?
Shall love , in building , grow so ruinous ?
If you did wed my sister for her wealth ,
Then , for her wealth's sake use her with more kindness :
Or , if you like elsewhere , do it by stealth ;
Muffle your false love with some show of blindness ;
Let not my sister read it in your eye ;
Be not thy tongue thy own shame's orator ;
Look sweet , speak fair , become disloyalty ;
Apparel vice like virtue's harbinger ;
Bear a fair presence , though your heart be tainted ;
Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint ;
Be secret-false : what need she be acquainted ?
What simple thief brags of his own attaint ?
'Tis double wrong to truant with your bed ,
And let her read it in thy looks at board :
Shame hath a bastard fame , well managed ;
Ill deeds are doubled with an evil word .
Alas ! poor women , make us but believe ,
Being compact of credit , that you love us ;
Though others have the arm , show us the sleeve ;
We in your motion turn , and you may move us .
Then , gentle brother , get you in again ;
Comfort my sister , cheer her , call her wife :
'Tis holy sport to be a little vain ,
When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife .

Sweet mistress ,what your name is else , I know not ,
Nor by what wonder you do hit of mine ,
Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not 
Than our earth's wonder ; more than earth divine .
Teach me , dear creature , how to think and speak :
Lay open to my earthy-gross conceit ,
Smother'd in errors , feeble , shallow , weak ,
The folded meaning of your words' deceit .
Against my soul's pure truth why labour you 
To make it wander in an unknown field ?
Are you a god ? would you create me new ?
Transform me then , and to your power I'll yield .
But if that I am I , then well I know 
Your weeping sister is no wife of mine ,
Nor to her bed no homage do I owe :
Far more , far more , to you do I decline .
O ! train me not , sweet mermaid , with thy note ,
To drown me in thy sister flood of tears :
Sing , siren , for thyself , and I will dote :
Spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs ,
And as a bed I'll take them and there lie ;
And , in that glorious supposition think 
He gains by death that hath such means to die :
Let Love , being light , be drowned if she sink !

What ! are you mad , that you do reason so ?

Not mad , but mated ; how , I do not know .

It is a fault that springeth from your eye .

For gazing on your beams ; fair sun , being by .

Gaze where you should , and that will clear your sight .

As good to wink , sweet love , as look on night .

Why call you me love ? call my sister so .
